jgacroeszabawazagshqwkhiwcqaoqrceogkrkts length 5 19471 page 19471 <html>

<head>
<meta name=Title content="The Dynamics of Glaciers">
<meta name=Keywords content="">
<meta http-equiv=Content-Type content="text/html; charset=macintosh">
<meta name=ProgId content=Word.Document>
<meta name=Generator content="Microsoft Word 11">
<meta name=Originator content="Microsoft Word 11">
<link rel=File-List href="/Mountain/The%20Dynamics%20of%20Glaciers_files/filelist.xml">
<title>The Dynamics of Glaciers</title>
<style>
<!--
 /* Font Definitions */
@font-face
	{font-family:"Times New Roman";
	panose-1:0 2 2 6 3 5 4 5 2 3;}
@font-face
	{font-family:Geneva;}
@font-face
	{font-family:Palatino;
	panose-1:0 2 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0;}
 /* Style Definitions */
p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal
	{margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	text-align:justify;
	text-indent:.25in;
	font-size:14.0pt;
	font-family:Palatino;}
h2
	{margin-top:6.0pt;
	margin-right:0in;
	margin-bottom:0in;
	margin-left:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	text-align:center;
	font-size:16.0pt;
	font-family:Geneva;}
h3
	{margin-top:6.0pt;
	margin-right:0in;
	margin-bottom:6.0pt;
	margin-left:0in;
	text-align:center;
	font-size:14.0pt;
	font-family:Palatino;}
p.MsoHeader, li.MsoHeader, div.MsoHeader
	{margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	text-align:center;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:Times;
	font-weight:bold;}
p.MsoFooter, li.MsoFooter, div.MsoFooter
	{margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	text-align:justify;
	text-indent:.25in;
	tab-stops:center 3.0in right 6.0in;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";}
table.MsoNormalTable
	{font-size:10.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";}
p.Quote, li.Quote, div.Quote
	{margin-top:12.0pt;
	margin-right:.25in;
	margin-bottom:0in;
	margin-left:27.0pt;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	text-align:justify;
	text-indent:-9.0pt;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:Times;}
@page Section1
	{size:8.5in 11.0in;
	margin:1.0in 1.0in 1.0in 1.0in;}
div.Section1
	{page:Section1;}
-->
</style>
</head>

<body bgcolor=white lang=EN-US style='tab-interval:.5in'>

<div class=Section1>

<h2>The Dynamics of Glaciers</h2>

<h3>Glacier formation</h3>

<p class=MsoNormal>Most ice is stationary; why and how do these rivers of ice
move? Before we find out how glaciers move, we need to know how they are
formed.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Glaciers are born in small hollows above the snow line. This
allows the snow to fall without melting in the summer time. The snow line in
Antarctica is at sea level, while in Africa at the temperate latitudes it is at
17,000 feet. The snowflakes fall. Their extremities melt or evaporate, i.e.
sublimate. They form into roughly spherical shape. If they survive the summer
melt they are referred to as <i>firn</i><span style='font-style:normal'>,
German ‘of last year’. Firn are the building blocks of glaciers. They are less
than one tenth of an inch in diameter. When packed together by succeeding
snowfall, they turn from the white of snow to the blue of ice as they squeeze
out the air. Additionally meltwater from the top will refreeze into the
crystals creating larger more compact crystals.</span></p>

<p class=Quote>“Snow accumulates in small hollows on mountainsides, and over
many years it changes into ice by recrystallization&#8212;refreezing of the
meltwater and compression; eventually the ice may become thick enough to move
because of its own weight.” (Glacier p48)</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>How long does this process take? It depends upon temperature
and rate of snowfall. In Iceland with plenty of snow and warmer summers to
produce the necessary meltwater, glaciers can be formed in 10 years. In
Antarctica where there is little snow and little warmth to produce the
necessary meltwater, the glaciers can be centuries in forming.</p>

<h3>Glacial Motion</h3>

<p class=MsoNormal>To be called a glacier, the ice must move under its own
weight. When does it begin to move? When does it cease being common ice pack
and commence being a glacier? It must reach a critical thickness when it can
overcome the internal strength of the ice and the friction between the ground
and the ice. That critical thickness is about 60 feet. Now that it has reached
the critical thickness, how does it move?</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Let us think a little about the huge ice mass of a glacier.
In the winter it snows. This fluffy snow turns into condensed ice, the firn, of
the glacier. When it freezes, it expands into the surrounding area. In the
summer when it thaws, the interior of the glacier is too thick to be thawed but
the exterior begins to melt. Now at each exterior spot a 9% reduction by volume
occurs, shrinking this huge block of ice ever so infinitesimally. But this is
occurring all over the glacier. So now the entire surface of the glacier is
covered with just a thin layer of water. If you’ve ever held onto a wet baby, a
melting ice cube, driven on an ice covered road with a little water on it, paid
attention to the signs that said ‘Slippery When Wet’, you will know that our
glacier has just become very slippery. Further more, in the lower latitudes
especially, most glaciers form on mountain-tops. They are formed very high up.
Hence when gravity pulls them down they have somewhere to go. Thus you have
this slippery thing, which weighs many tons, being pulled down hill. This
method of moving is called basal sliding.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Basal sliding will not occur unless the surface melting
extends to the bottom of the glacier. If the ground is too cold and the bottom
won’t melt, then the glacier won’t slide along. The thin layer of water acts a
lubricant, as we would expect. For one it releases pressure on the sides by
reducing volume. And two, the liquid form of water readily flows, pulling
everything with it as does a stream. Finally the flowing of water and ice
generates a heat, which melts more of the ice, shrinking the volume more,
adding more lubricant, adding to the cycle. But if the bottom is frozen there
can be no basal sliding. Try sliding down a hot slide in your bare skin without
sending water down first and you will understand. No matter how much water
there is going down the sides it will in no way help you slide. The water has
to be under you, as every slider knows. </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>At the polar regions, glaciers don’t move by sliding. They
move, however, by internal deformation. Basal sliding and internal deformation
are the two ways by which glaciers move. Most glaciers do a combination of the
two, but the polar ground never gets warm enough to melt the bottom of the glacier,
hence they only travel by internal deformation. </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Another name for internal deformation is creep. Initially it
was thought that glaciers moved like a liquid, but there were a few
discrepancies. Then it was found that metals will move, when close to their
melting point. They will also shatter with a sharp blow, while liquids won’t
shatter. Glaciers also shatter, as we shall see. The solid approaches
dissolution into liquid form, weakening its bonds, but not quite enough to
liquefy. They called this movement by pre-liquid metals creep. Hence glaciers
move by sliding and creeping or a combination of the two.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Creeping or internal deformation occurs when the glacier
becomes so heavy that it flattens its molecules out in order to deal with the
weight.</p>

<p class=Quote>“The weight of the ice itself provides the stress that causes glacier
ice to creep. Under stupendous pressure, the crystals of the ice rearrange
themselves in layers of atoms more or less parallel to the surface of the
glacier. These layers then begin gliding over one another. The incremental
movement of the layers of atoms within each crystal&#8212;plus some slippage
between crystals, a phenomenon not yet fully understood&#8212; constitutes
internal deformation.” (Glacier p49)</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Hence the ice crystals are hanging out without any purpose
to their puny existence. Then the orders come down from above. “Time to
organize guys.” The crystals organize their atoms. They flatten out. Then
called by the force of gravity, they begin sliding over each other inexorably
downhill. What began as an innocent, light, airy snowflake, once organized,
becomes one of the most devastating influences upon the earth.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>These moving Glaciers grab up debris, when they partially
liquefy and then freeze. The water sinks into the cracks and then freezes, further
expanding the cracks and also seizing onto what it had frozen into. When the
block of ice begins moving the debris is pulled along. This thawing and
freezing, which allows it to grab onto things also allows it to move around
obstacles, always seeking the lowest ground. When an obstacle is encountered,
the area of the glacier partially melts because of the friction, slides around
and then reforms on the other side. The scientists call this regelation. This
process further reduces the friction. Thus when glaciers are sliding, it will
not pick up what it is sliding over, but will slide right over small enough
obstacles. But when it stops sliding, perhaps because of the winter freeze, and
the ground freezes up, it will grab up the same debris that it passed over when
it was sliding. This is the fine sand paper of the glacier.</p>

<h3>Glacial Velocity</h3>

<p class=MsoNormal>Most glaciers move quite slowly. There are three elements
that influence glacier speed: 1) the thickness of the glacier, 2) the slope,
and 3) the temperature of the glacier. The thicker the glacier, the steeper the
slope, and the warmer the glacial ice, the quicker it moves. If the glacier is
too thin, on too shallow of a slope, or too cold, it will stop. An increase of
only a few percent in thickness can increase speed up to 20 percent.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The glaciers in the warmer regions, relying primarily on
basal sliding, move more quickly than the glaciers in the frozen regions, which
mainly creep because it never gets warm enough to melt the ice. One warm
climate glacier moves a yard a day or a fifth of a mile per year. A cold
climate glacier in Antarctica moves only a quarter inch a day, a yard every
three months, or a fifth of a mile in 90 years. In this case the warm glacier
moves 100 times faster than the cold glacier. </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The last factor influencing the speed of the glacier is the
slope of the geography it is based upon. If there is a moderate slope, it will
be pulled downhill gradually like a river. If it is too steep, then it will
crack and break off. This was one of the major pieces of evidence that
convinced scientists that glaciers are solids that move rather than an
extremely viscous fluid. Fluids never crack. </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The Eastern Sierras have an extremely sharp slope. Hence the
glacier would crack off before it could get to the Owens Valley. On the Western
slope, which is much more shallow, the glaciers were able to move much farther
down the side of the mountain into the valleys. On the west we see evidence of
glacial rivers. On the east we mainly see evidence of glacial erosion. </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The glacier cracking is an example of getting too far ahead
of yourself. The glaciers that move a little more slowly keep together and
generate more continuous power, while the glaciers that move too quickly
dissipate their energy because their forward energy disconnects. The Tai Chi
metaphor or life metaphor is obvious. Moving too quickly dis-integrates. Don’t
get ahead of yourself.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>If there is no slope, glaciers can still move, but it is
because they create their own altitude. The ice sheet will keep moving as long
as some part of the glacier is taller than other parts.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Glacier speed is not constant across the glacier. The top
half of the glacier moves faster than the bottom, presumably because of
friction. The sides also flow slower than the middle, also because of friction.
The middle of the glacier at the equilibrium line flows fastest, the head and
terminus flow slower. Above the equilibrium line the glacier grows faster than
it melts; this is called the accumulation zone. Below the equilibrium line, the
glacier melts faster than it grows; this is called the ablation zone. The
season of the year also has an effect on the glacier speed. In summer the
glacier might flow up to 20% faster than in winter, because of sliding.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Ice in the accumulation zone flows downward relative to the
surface of the glacier, from accumulated snowfall, while ice in the ablation
zone flows upward. Hence the ice at the top of the snout, the terminus, is the
oldest ice in the glacier. Remember even when a glacier is retreating, the ice
is still flowing downhill. It’s just melting faster than it can replenish
itself.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Because of all these diverse velocities within the glacier
itself, stress fractures set up to equalize pressure. These are invisible until
they suddenly open up as a crevasse. These instant crevasses are why glaciers
are so dangerous to climb. Because the stresses are minute and constantly
forming, even a sharp sound can trigger the creation of a crevasse. If the land
under a glacier is very steep then a transverse crevasse forms. The crevasse
only forms in the top 100 feet of the glacier. Underneath the ice is too
heavily weighted down to crack. Very steep glacial inclines that cause
crevasses are call ice falls. These are the most dangerous because at any time
the ice can separate from the glacier by melting and fall. Many glacier
crevasses have a crisscross pattern because the different speeds of the flowing
glacier form cracks that are in the direction of the glacier flow, while cracks
perpendicular to the glacier occur when it is accelerating downhill.</p>

<h3>Glacial Surges</h3>

<p class=MsoNormal>Glaciers are normally quite well behaved. However they
occasionally break out of their normal everyday pattern and cut loose at speeds
up to 100 times their average. These are called glacial surges. Our warm glacier
traveled a yard a day or a fifth of a mile per year. Muldrow Glacier in 1964
was clocked at 16 yards an hour or 400 yards per day. Most warm glaciers travel
at a fraction of a mile per year, while surging glaciers will travel miles in
months. One glacier surge traveled 12 miles in 3 years; this was the longest.
Another glacial surge went 8 miles in less than 3 months; this was the quickest
on record.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>The difference between surges and normal glacier movement
besides speed is that the surges might last between 3 years at the longest and
only a few months at the shortest. Glacial surges are as unpredictable as
earthquakes. No scientist knows when they will start or stop. Neither do they
know which glaciers will surge and which will not. Certain glaciers do seem to
go through periodic surges.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Glaciers that surge build up an ‘ice reservoir’ between the
head and the middle of the glacier. This contrasts with a normal glacier, which
is continuously redistributing its annual snowfall. Because of the buildup many
glaciers are actually retreating just before they surge. It seems that the ice
reservoir has been blocked by some kind of obstruction. When it reaches a
critical mass, it bursts through the friction with a magnified velocity and
power. Once it has spent its wad, it goes into retreat again, and begins
building up another reservoir of ice for the next surge.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>One scientist even suggested that a surge in Antarctica
could set off another Ice Age. Once the surge was over then ice pack would
begin to retreat and the Ice Age would begin to abate.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>There are two lessons to be learned. One is that instead of
letting your anger build up and exploding outward, it might be better to let a
little out at a time to avoid the reservoir buildup. The other is that instead
of dissipating your energy in small chunks, it might be better to buildup a
reservoir of energy, to release all at once for greater power.</p>

<h3>Glaciers maintain constant thickness</h3>

<p class=MsoNormal>The reason that surges are so unusual for a glacier is that
the one constant for glaciers is thickness. They try to maintain a constant
thickness throughout their length. </p>

<p class=Quote>“With the obvious and dramatic exception of surges, the overall
result of variations in a glacier’s flow is the maintenance of a more or less
constant thickness of ice.” (Glacier p59)</p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-top:12.0pt'>When it snows at the head, the
glacier thickens causing the glacier to speed up. This speed attenuates,
stretches out the glacier, and its snout increases. The glacier grows in
length, but stays the same thickness. When it doesn’t snow, the glacier loses
thickness, causing it to slow down, and then to shrink in length. The glacier
is retreating. This stretching of the glacier causes the center to go fastest
and the ends the slowest, just as glacier research has shown. </p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Using glacier terminology borrowed from economics: when the
glacier has a positive balance, i.e. an annual surplus, then it will grow in
length. A glacier has a negative balance when the net income, i.e. snowfall, is
less than the net outgo, i.e. melting and cracking off. When the glacier has a
negative balance, i.e. an annual deficit, then the glacier will shrink in
length. The net effect is that the glacier thickness will remain constant while
the length will grow and shrink.</p>

<p class=MsoNormal>Ice that doesn’t move will just increase in thickness with
the snowfall. When this ice reaches a critical thickness then it compresses
itself so much that it cannot maintain its own weight. It begins to press down
upon itself. The pressure is so great that the ice on the bottom squeezes out
and up the other side, to escape this excruciating pressure. A glacier a
half-mile thick exerts a pressure of 62 tons per square foot on any surface it
touches.</p>

<p class=Quote>“The thicker the ice the more effective the glacier as an engine
of erosion. A glacier only half a mile thick exerts pressure of 62 tons per
square foot. This pressure crushes all the material beneath and adjacent to it
and pushes the glacier’s rasp like tools&#8212;the jagged rock fragments frozen
into ice&#8212;deeper into the underlying bedrock.” (Glacier p29)</p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-top:12.0pt'>This same pressure that crushes
everything under it, also causes the ice to squish out, thereby moving forward
and down. These tons of downward pressure cause glaciers to deform and move. It
also scours the land. What does it do to the land? This leads us into our next
section.</p>

</div>
<div><p class=MsoNormal>&nbsp;</p>
<p class=MsoNormal><a href="/index.%20html" class="link">Home</a> 
&nbsp <a href="/Mountain/mountain.html" class="link">Mountain Page</a> 
&nbsp <a href="/Mountain/mountain_ToC.html" class="link">Table of Contents</a>
&nbsp <a href="/Mountain/09 Glacial Landforms.htm" class="link">Next Page</a></p>
</div>
<!-- Google tag (gtag.js) --> <script async src="https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtag/js?id=G-W9HC8VBFQ5"></script> <script> window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function gtag(){dataLayer.push(arguments);} gtag('js', new Date()); gtag('config', 'G-W9HC8VBFQ5'); </script>
</body>

</html>
 contentType 9 text/html url 74 http://donlehmanjr.com:80/Mountain/08%20The%20Dynamics%20of%20Glaciers.htm responseCode 3 200 