vkemnexijicepkxolowklgushqeelsnmhqsqkifa length 5 21897 page 21897 <HEAD>
<TITLE>
Musique concrete vs. Psychedelia
</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY bgcolor=#ffffff text=#000000 vlink="Black" link="Gray">
<BLOCKQUOTE>
<BLOCKQUOTE>
<BLOCKQUOTE>
<FONT FACE="Arial" SIZE="2">

<H1>FABLES OF THE DECONSTRUCTION</H2>
<H2>by Edwin Pouncey, <a href="http://www.thewire.co.uk/">The
Wire</a> #185, July 1999</H2>
<p>
<H3>Undercurrents #7: in the latest in our series uncovering the hidden
wiring of 20th century music, Edwin Pouncey shows how rock 'n' roll's face
was changed forever when the race to go further out brought it in touch
with the 60s avant garde.</H3>
<br>
<br>
One May evening in 1967 at San Francisco's Matrix club, Steppenwolf's bass
player Nick St Nicholas got up on stage, plugged his guitar into an
amplifier and Echo-lite unit and proceeded to experiment. Urged on by St
Nicholas's freeform freak out, the rest of the group mounted the stage,
picked up their instruments and joined in. "Before we knew it we were more
or less improvising," reflected the group's leader John Kay two years
after the event, "jamming, squeezing and shaping a musical thing which
lasted for 20 minutes and broke finally into "The Pusher", which astounded
us and the audience at how well it came off." Kay attributed this early
improvisational rendering of what was to become one of Steppenwolf's most
popular songs to a range of influences, from the electroacoustic
compositions of Edgard Var&egrave;se to "the French semi-electronic
symphonic school of music".
<p>
That a biker-favoured outfit like Steppenwolf were willing to push their
primal brand of rock 'n' roll towards the more academic ideals of
experimental music and musique concr&egrave;te adds a hidden dimension to
the lyrics of their greatest hit: musically, they really <i>were</i>
(re)born to be wild.
<p>
"We did "The Pusher" every night and the intro part just kind of evolved
as a time for us to do whatever we wanted," remembers drummer Jerry
Edmonton. "People started talking about the band after that. "The Pusher"
got people saying, 'There's this band from Canada and they're way out
there'."
<p>
As with countless other 60s groups, the main ingredient that made
Steppenwolf sound so out there was lysergic acid diethylamide, the
hallucinogenic potion that had seeped out of the US government's own
secret laboratories. Once it hit the streets, via the proselytising
efforts of Timothy Leary and Ken Kesey, it inadvertently became the
creative tool for a generation hellbent opening up heaven, while bringing
the establishment crashing down around them. The other ingredient was, of
course, the music itself, which -- along with attitudes towards sex,
fashion, art and the ongoing Vietnam war -- was ripe for transformation.
<p>
Rock music and the academy have rarely had anything useful to say to each
other, either before or after the 60s, and it would be too glib to
attribute the dialogue going on between them to the special openness that
characterised that purportedly class-free decade. Besides, the academy had
begun its end of the conversation way back at the beginning of modernism,
which itself was breach-birthed at the turn of the century during the
cataclysm of the Industrial Revolution. On one level, modernism was an
artistic response to the deepening sense of alienation that resulted from
the rapid industrialisation of town and country, and of work and leisure.
Within academic music, it flowered most brightly in the post-war
experiments happening in electronics, electroacoustic composition and
musique concr&egrave;te. Indeed, it could be argued that modernism's
themes, of the fractured and disconnected self, found their fullest
expression in concr&egrave;te -- a musical form defined by fragmentation
and discontinuity.
<p>
In the 60s, the fragmentation that was made concr&egrave;te in the work of
composers like Luciano Berio and Pierre Henry discovered a likeness, if a
not wholly accurate reflection, in the distorting-mirror music of the LSD
generation. But whereas concr&egrave;te art seemed to 
perma-fix the very process of fragmentation, psychedelia frequently
charted an Edenic search for 
child-like wholeness. When concr&egrave;te composers and psychedelic rock
got to look each other in the eye during the 60's, they didn't necessarily
see the same thing. But in psychedelia, the more utopian of the
concr&egrave;te composers possibly caught a fleeting glimpse of restored
wholeness, while in the fragmentation of concr&egrave;te, psychedelia's
more farsighted cosmonauts were gifted with a method for expressing the 
consciousness-splintering aspects of an acid trip. In the process, those
with good ears noticed how concr&egrave;te's juxtapositions of ill-matched
tones and timbres could also approximate the intense, physically ravishing
aspects of the acid experience.
<p>
No wonder, then, that Grateful Dead, the West Coast group that totally
absorbed acid culture as a means of enlightenment and expression, embraced
academy methods when, on their second album <i>Anthem Of The Sun</i>
(1968), they attempted a musical recapitulation of an acid trip. For their
projected assault on reality, they brought in keyboardist Tom Constanten,
at the invitation of his friend, Dead bassist Phil Lesh, who was himself a
composition student of Berio. Despite guitarist Jerry Garcia's formidable
command of volume and feedback, The Dead felt that their first,
self-titled album had failed to capture the essential mindwarp element of
the group live, and thus sought to extend their sonic armoury in the
studio with techniques picked up from the academic avant garde. With the
enthusiastic participation of Garcia and Lesh, Constanten applied prepared
piano and tape montage methods to the latter part of "That's It For The
Other One". Collaged from superimposed performance tapes, his experimental
symphony suddenly folds into a bout of musique concr&egrave;te that falls
somewhere between Var&egrave;se's <i>D&eacute;serts</i> and the respective
keyboard deconstructions of John Cage and Conlon Nancarrow. Constanten
created one effect by diving into the piano, having first pulled the
string on a gyroscope and placed it against the sounding board. "The
sound," he revealed, "is not unlike that of a chainsaw being taken into
it."
<p>
<b>Acid burns into rock</b>
<p>
All of which was a long away from the kind of upbeat rock 'n' roll which
The Beatles had brought over to America for their appearance on <i>The Ed
Sullivan Show</i> in 1963. Three years later, the group's moptop innocence
had given way to a hairier, acid-burned recalcitrance. Both John Lennon
and Paul McCartney were equally fascinated by music's 60's avant garde,
and much to the muted disapproval of producer George Martin, they began to
assemble tapes that attempted to mirror LSD trips and which they would
then splice into the arrangements of their songs. Thus the backwards tape
treatments and Indian war whoops on "Tomorrow Never Knows", the clanging
tram car sound hallucination on the end section of "Strawberry Fields
Forever", the tumbling calliope tape loop collage that runs through "Being
For The Benefit Of Mr Kite", and the blurred, <i>Through The Looking
Glass</i> radio effect that haunts "I Am The Walrus" were mechanically
aided flashbacks to their acid dreams (and nightmares). This approach
reached its zenith (or nadir, depending on which side of the fence the
listener chose to sit) with "Revolution No 9", a pure slab of musique
concr&egrave;te that was included on <i>The White Album</i>.
<p>
Unfortunately, only Lennon and his new bride Yoko Ono carried on where
"Revolution No 9" left off, with their pair of 'Unfinished Music' albums,
<i>Two Virgins</i> (1968) and <i>Life With The Lions</i> (1969). Before
the couple met in October 1967 at London's Lisson Gallery, Yoko Ono had
already been an active participant in George Maciunas's radically
mischievous, 
neo-Dadaist Fluxus art group, and had performed with John Cage, David
Tudor and Toshiro Mayuzumi. Cage's crude 1940 prototype for concrete
music, where objects were given the status of musical instruments, had
since been remodelled in Western Europe by Pierre Schaeffer's musique
concr&egrave;te approach, and together with Ono's Fluxus-schooled
influence and Lennon's surreal Goonish humour, it was probably this
version that formed the basis for what one current rock guide has
described as "perhaps the most skipped-over track on any Beatles album".
On the other hand, "Revolution No 9" continues to fascinate as a perfectly
orchestrated deconstruction of everything The Beatles stood for; where
melody, harmony and lyrical invention are rudely trashed and replaced with
'noise'. In the process, they temporarily reinvented themselves and threw
down a gauntlet for their more musically adventurous contemporaries to
seize upon.
<p>
Many of the groups who subsequently fed found sounds into their songs were
blissfully unaware of such musique concr&egrave;te pioneers as Pierre
Schaeffer, Pierre Henry, Karlheinz Stockhausen or John Cage. They were
merely following The Beatles' example by adding the approriate
'psychedelic' effects to an otherwise standard pop song. Although it is
doubtful whether The Lovin' Spoonful fully realised what they were
creating in 1966 by introducing a tape of traffic noise and road drills
during the instrumental break of "Summer In The City", they ensured that
the song would be remembered in the breach rather than the strict
observance of its cheerfully lazy harmony. Regardless of the group's -- or
producer's -- motivations, the sudden intrusion of the atonal noises of
the outside world ripping through its tiny rent in the fabric of pop
alerted radio audiences to a wholly other reality. (Conversely, they
signalled a way back to reality for fazed, confused or lost day trippers.)
<p>
Other notable pop and rock musique concr&egrave;te flirtations from this
period include Alex Chilton's pre-Big Star unit The Box Tops' 'sampling'
of the sound of a jet passing overhead on "The Letter" (1967); Beach Boy
Brian Wilson's atmospheric, evocative and 
lonesome-sounding train and dog barking session on "Caroline, No" (1966);
and the 
earth-shaking A-bomb blast at the epicentre of Love's wired punk anthem
"Seven And Seven Is" (from 1967's <i>Da Capo</i>). Apart from the obvious
anti-war reference, this explosion commemorated the moment when rock 'n'
roll innocence was permanently blown away, clearing the way for the
massive changes that would rise up out of the ruins. As the war in Vietnam
dragged on, politically engaged groups honed rock into a weapon of protest
aimed at tipping the balance pf popular opinion against US involvement. By
detonating their sound bomb on the radio, Love were announcing that a
collective finger had pushed the button. Just as 80s rappers would sample
the shocking sounds of drive-by shootings for exploitative and
journalistic purposes, so 60s rock musicians were using the sounds of
combat and consumerism gone mad both to excite/incite their listeners and
to drive their protests home.
<p>
<b>Freaky &eacute;lectronique</b>
<p>
Those who knew and were passionate about contemporary classical and
experimental music incorporated it into their own work with more care and
deliberation. Frank Zappa's early introduction to the music of Stravinsky,
Holst, Ives, Webern and, more importantly, Edgard Var&egrave;se (mingled
with his love for 50s doowop And R&B) had a profound effect on his
interpretation of modern rock music. When Var&egrave;se died on 6 November
1965, Zappa composed "The Return Of The Son Of Monster Magnet (Unfinished
Ballet In Two Tableaux)" in his memory. The piece took up an entire side
of The Mothers Of Invention's debut album, the four-sided <i>Freak
Out!</i>, which was released the following year. "[This] is what freaks
sound like when you turn them loose in a recording studio at one o'clock
in the morning on $500 worth of rented percussion equipment," Zappa wrote
in his sleevenote. "A bright snappy number. Hotcha!" The resulting
"snappy" mix of electronics, Var&egrave;se-inspired percussive sonorities,
and strange spoken word exchanges between Pamela 'Suzy Creamcheese'
Zarubica and the notorious Los Angeles producer, musician and eccentric
Kim Fowley, was to become one of the earliest recorded examples of what
can be loosely termed 'rock concr&egrave;te'. Central to his music,
however, was Zappa's William Burroughs-tinged sense of humour. Zappa
subliminally incorporated Burroughs's cut-up tape recording techniques
into such 'rock concr&egrave;te' pieces as "Nasal Retentive Calliope
Music" and "The Chrome Plated Megaphone Of Destiny", which concluded The
Mothers' 1968 album <i>We're Only In It For Money</i> (the listener was
instructed to read Franz Kafka's short story <i>In The Penal Colony</i>
before playback). "The Chrome Plated Megaphone..." apparently refers to a
voicebox found between a toy doll's legs; but alongside its 'freak'
humour, you can also detect warped echoes of Var&egrave;se's
<i>Po&egrave;me &Eacute;lectronique</i> and Stockhausen's breakthrough
work of electronic tape mutation, <i>Gesang der J&uuml;nglinge</i>,
bubbling under and eventually breaking the surface. For the album sleeve,
Zappa hired the graphic artist Cal Schenkel to satirise the Carnaby
Street, pop art sentimentality of Peter Blake's cover for <i>Sgt Pepper's
Lonely Hearts Club Band</i>. It misled many critics assuming that "The
Chrome Plated Megaphone..." was a cynical swipe at Lennon and McCartney's
"A Day In The Life", the last track on <i>Sgt Pepper's</i>, when in fact
Zappa was fine-tuning his personal art of noise. The culmination of
Zappa's commitment to contemporary classical and electronic music was
unleashed one month later as <i>Lumpy Gravy</i>, an orchestral work which
was recorded in New York with the 50 piece Abnuceals Emuukha Electric
Symphony Orchestra & Chorus, a few stray Mothers and various cohorts from
his entourage of freaks. <i>Lumpy Gravy</i> is a crucial work for the way
it combines classically motivated interludes, electronic abstractions and
rambling spoken word compositions within a basic rock structure. Whereas
other 'rock stars' frequently toyed with vague notions of musique
concr&egrave;te and experimental music, Zappa incorporated them into a
medium that extended his musical repertoire and pushed the prowess of The
Mothers Of Invention to new heights of skill and endurance.
<p>
<img src="/history/pic/usalp.jpeg" alt="United  
States   of   America" align=right>

Among those to take Zappa's experimental music approach seriously were the
rebellious 60s West Coast superstars Jefferson Airplane, who approached
him to produce their third album, <i>After Bathing At Baxter's</i> (1967).
Zappa declined the offer due to pressure of work, but he eventually teamed
up with the group's vocalist Grace Slick on 5 June 1968 to record a
freeform composition which they had 
co-written entitled "Would You Like A Snack". It is typically erratic
keyboard and percussion dominated Zappa number, complete with deviant
sexual vocalising from Slick in operatic diva mode. This short piece sends
the imagination racing over what might have occurred had Zappa taken
control of the Airplane for a whole flight. Even without Zappa's
involvement, however, the extended soloing of guitarist Jorma Kaukonen and
bass player Jack Casady on <i>Baxter's</i> is clearly  enriched by the
example of Frank's forays into the avant garde, and their psychedelic
protest rock is transformed into something more substantial and enduring
than a 'plastic' soundtrack for the corporate 'Flower Power'
counterculture.
<p>
<b>Concr&egrave;te in the limelight</b>
<p>
By the late 60s and early 70s, even a lethargic music industry was
beginning to wake up to the realisation that the boundaries of rock were
expanding, and soon the hunt was on to sign up any group that strayed
beyond the familiar guitar, bass, drums and vocals line-up. One label that
attempted to educate the hippy hordes, while shamelessly cashing in on the
current craze for electronic and experimental music, was the Mercury
Record subsidiary Limelight, whose catalogue of musique concr&egrave;te,
electronic music and classical Indian ragas was described as "The Total
Experience In Sound". Packaged in elaborate gatefold sleeves, their
abstract artwork mirrored the coloured oil lightshows which were a major
feature of any rock concert at the time, Limelight set out to introduce
the music of such experimental composers as Pierre Henry, Kagel, Eimert,
Ligeti, Berio, Ferrari and Xenakis to audiences who, until <i>Anthem Of
The Sun</i> hit the racks, were probably unaware of Henry's equally mind
blowing <i>Le Voyage</i>, an electronic score based on the Tibetan Book Of
The Dead. Limelight also signed the electronic rock group Fifty Foot Hose,
who recorded their lone <i>Cauldron</i> album for the label before sliding
into obscurity (until that is, they were given the kiss of life in the 90s
by the same fanbase that had helped to resurrect the career of The Silver
Apples).
<p>
Unlike the many who were only just discovering his work through the
Limelight label, Pierre Henry was no stranger to psychedelic rock. In 1967
he had collaborated with Michel Colombier on a series of electronic pieces
based around pop and rock themes. The resulting <i>Messe Pour Le Temps
Pr&eacute;sent</i> marked a dramatic change of direction for Henry. With
compositions such as "Psych&eacute; Rock", Henry's joyous demolition of
the rock 'n' roll standard "Louie, Louie", he made contact with rock
audiences, which discovered correspondences between the disintegrating
logic of his rock concr&egrave;te and their own hallucinogenically fuelled
visions of the world. Two years after the release of <i>Messe Pour Le
Temps Pr&eacute;sent</i>, Henry was contacted by Gary Wright from the UK
group Spooky Tooth, with a view to collaborating on an electronic mass
called <i>Ceremony</i>. When the album was released, full page adverts
were taken out in the rock press, describing it as 'Electronique
Fantastique'. But Spooky Tooth's leaden Progressive dirge, once plugged in
to Henry's accompanying electronic squeal, sounds unconnected and
toothless. More of a mess than mass.
<p>
An experimental composer who left a more significant mark on 60s rock was
Jospeh Byrd. Working with his 'electronic rock' group The United States Of
America, Byrd narrowed the gulf that separated 'serious' music from rock
'n' roll. Recording in 1967, he combined the psychedelic social attack of
Zappa's Mothers and the neon-lit starkness of The Velvet Undergroud (The
USA's singer, Dorothy Moskowitz, bore a passing resemblance, both vocal
and physical, to Nico) with his own Morton Subotnick-influenced sheets of
ring-modulated and synthesized sound to produce the (still undervalued)
American answer to Henry's and Colombier's <i>Messe Pour Le Temps
Pr&eacute;sent</i>.
<p>
<b>Europe goes loopy</b>
<p>
Across Europe too, rock was going through radical changes. In Germany, the
beat boom of the early 60s had been replaced with a musical aesthetic that
critiqued the country's 
post-war industrial rebirth while looking out towards the cosmos for
inspiration. Labelled 'Krautrock' by the British music press, one of the
first and most influential of these groups was Can. Filled with the spirit
of change, the group's first recording session in June 1968 included a
recording of the riots which had brought Paris to a standstill the
previous month (the tape was made by David Johnson, one of the founders of
the group). The same year, Holger Czukay and studio engineer Rolf Dammers
(under the pseudonym of the Technical Space Composers Crew) created the
cosmic concr&egrave;te masterpiece <i>Canaxis V</i>, which rivalled the
best electronic work of Czukay's 'acoustic sound painting' layered tape
loops of a Vietnamese boat woman singing and gamelan styled guitar over a
repeated electronic choral background to create a 'worlds within worlds'
effect that is as alien as it is familiar. Sounding like it could have
been beamed down from a distant galaxy, rather than a tape montage of
electronics and a shortwave radio transmission, Czukay's message seemed to
be that not only earth but also the cosmos beyond could be brought into
earshot at the turn of a dial.
<p>
The nearest British equivalent to Can was Pink Floyd, whose post-Syd
Barrett shows were equipped with quadraphonic sound systems that blasted
out such sound effexts as UFOs taking off and giant footsteps walking
above the heads of the audience. Of course, Pink Floyd also encouraged a
strain of pomposity to enter the rock arena which gradually took centre
stage once the 60s had burnt itself out.
<p>
<b>Rewind into the future</b>
<p>
When William Burroughs maintained that the future, as well as the past,
bleeds through the ruptures opened up in the cut-up process, he could have
been describing the work of today's self-consciously postmodern sampling
composers. The 'plunderphonic' hybrids of John Oswald have built one of
the most enduring bridges connecting the pioneer spirit of the 60s with
the 90s' relentless referentiality. His psychedelic plunderphonics piece
<i>Grayfolded</i> (1995) was directly inspired by the experimentation that
produced <i>Anthem Of The Sun</i>. Oswald spliced together live selections
from various locations of recordings of The Grateful Dead's "Dark Star" to
create a telescopic, sonic time tunnel. Oswald's simultaneous celebration
and extension of The Dead's musical legacy shows that the song might
remain the same, but the way of singing it has been irretrievably altered.
<p>
<a href="">Copyright</a> &copy;
1999 <a href="http://thewire.co.uk/">The Wire</a>. Reprinted with
permission.
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

<center>
<a href="/history/">[The History of
Electronic Music @ pHinnWeb]</a>
</center>
</font>
<br>
<br>
</BODY>
</HTML>

 contentType 9 text/html url 62 http://www.phinnweb.org:80/history/articles/concrete_rock.html responseCode 3 200 