xmciiisanchgzeoqzcemwcpczcmkmakcbaxgzcpo length 5 19308 page 19308 <HTML>
<!--This file created 8:23 PM  11/28/00 by Claris Home Page version 3.0-->
<HEAD>
   <TITLE>Electronic Textbook of Dermatology--Botanical Dermatology , Introduction</TITLE>
   <META NAME=GENERATOR CONTENT="Claris Home Page 3.0">
   <X-CLARIS-WINDOW TOP=75 BOTTOM=556 LEFT=286 RIGHT=962>
   <X-CLARIS-TAGVIEW MODE=minimal>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF">
<CENTER><A HREF="../toc2.html"><IMG SRC="../etd2.jpg" WIDTH=488 HEIGHT=100 X-CLARIS-USEIMAGEWIDTH X-CLARIS-USEIMAGEHEIGHT ALIGN=bottom></A><BR>
<FONT SIZE="+4" FACE="Brush Script MT"><B><STRONG>Botanical
Dermatology</STRONG></B></FONT></CENTER>

<H2><CENTER><FONT SIZE="-1"><B>Thomas W. McGovern, MAJ, MC<BR>
Theodore M. Barkley, PhD</B></FONT>

<HR>

<B>Disclaimer</B></CENTER></H2>

<P>Although available to the public via the Internet, this material
is targeted to an audience of trained clinical dermatologists.
Treatments and techniques described herein should only be done under
the supervision of a physician experienced in their proper
application. Failure to adhere to this guideline will substantially
increase the risk of serious adverse consequences, including bodily
injury or death.&nbsp;

<HR>

</P>

<CENTER><TABLE BORDER=0 CELLSPACING=5 CELLPADDING=7 WIDTH="80%">
   <TR>
      <TD COLSPAN=2 BGCOLOR="#99FF66">
         <P><B>&nbsp;I. Introduction to systemic botany, the
         organizing and naming of plants</B></P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD BGCOLOR="#CCFFCC">
         <P><A HREF="#back">Background</A></P>
      </TD>
      <TD BGCOLOR="#CCFFCC">
         <P><A HREF="#pid">Plant Identification</A></P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD COLSPAN=2 BGCOLOR="#99FF66">
         <P><B>II. Major Categories of plant-induced skin
         reactions:</B></P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD BGCOLOR="#CCFFCC">
         <P><A HREF="http://telemedicine.org/botanica/bot2.htm">Contact
         Urticaria (toxin -mediated)</A></P>
      </TD>
      <TD BGCOLOR="#CCFFCC">
         <P><A HREF="http://telemedicine.org/botanica/bot3.htm">Irritant
         Dermatitis (mechanical)</A><IMG SRC="cactus.gif" WIDTH=97 HEIGHT=88 ALIGN=middle></P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD BGCOLOR="#CCFFCC">
         <P><A HREF="http://telemedicine.org/botanica/bot2.htm#icu">Contact
         Urticaria (immunologic)</A></P>
      </TD>
      <TD BGCOLOR="#CCFFCC">
         <P><A HREF="http://telemedicine.org/botanica/bot4.htm">Irritant
         Dermatitis (chemical)</A></P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD BGCOLOR="#CCFFCC">
         <P><A HREF="http://telemedicine.org/botanica/bot6.htm" TARGET="">Allergic
         Contact Dermatitis</A> <IMG SRC="pivyc.gif" WIDTH=102 HEIGHT=91 ALIGN=middle></P>
      </TD>
      <TD BGCOLOR="#CCFFCC">
         <P><A HREF="http://telemedicine.org/botanica/bot5.htm" TARGET="">Phytophotodermatitis</A>
         <IMG SRC="margarita.gif" WIDTH=78 HEIGHT=104 ALIGN=middle></P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD COLSPAN=2 BGCOLOR="#99FF66">
         <P><B>III. </B><A HREF="http://telemedicine.org/botanica/bot7.htm" TARGET=""><B>Occupational
         plant dermatitis</B></A></P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
</TABLE>
 <B><I>&nbsp;</I></B></CENTER>

<P><B><I>While this chapter describes the 'dark side' of human
interaction with plants, it is a mistake to think that these
reactions occur with a majority of plants. Of over 500,000 plant
species, only about 12,000 have been studied. Within these, some
11,000 chemical compounds have been found. Most of these plants and
their chemicals do not harm people. In fact, only about 500
plant-derived chemicals are reported to be toxic via topical or
parenteral exposure.</I></B><A NAME=Ref1></A><A HREF="botrefs1.htm#1"><SUP>1</SUP></A>
<B><I>Finally, potentially harmful plants are often deleterious only
at particular times during their life cycles.</I></B></P>

<P>&nbsp;<B>&nbsp;</B></P>

<P><B><A NAME=BACK></A>I. SOME BOTANICAL
BACKGROUND<A NAME=Ref2></A></B><A HREF="botrefs1.htm#2"><SUP>2-7</SUP></A></P>

<P>Plant names seem to keep changing. Why are the Umbelliferae also
known as the Apiaceae or the Compositae known as Asteraceae? Is
poison ivy a member of the genus <I>Rhus</I> or not? The original two
kingdoms of Animals and Plants have expanded to five recognized
kingdoms (Animalia, Plantae, Fungi, Protista, and Monera). "Plant
Dermatitis" now includes reactions to organisms in three of the five
kingdoms. This chapter focuses on responses within the Kingdom
Plantae.</P>

<P>Systematic botany has two goals; one is to describe the world's
flora by classifying them in a hierarchy of similarity
(<B>taxonomy</B>), and the other is to provide referable handles for
these entities so that they may be referred to accurately
(<B>nomenclature).</B> Taxonomy utilizes information from numerous
sources, including many techniques of analysis and synthesis. As
scientific study progresses, the understanding of natural
relationships grows, and the categorization of plants continually
changes. Plant nomenclature, on the other hand, is a quasi-legal
scheme that is based upon the "International Code of Botanical
Nomenclature" (ICBN) which is maintained by a body called the
International Association of Plant Taxonomy (IAPT)
.<A NAME=Ref8></A><A HREF="botrefs1.htm#8"><SUP>8</SUP></A> The ICBN
has been codifying the procedures for applying referable names to
plants since 1867.<A NAME=Ref7></A><A HREF="botrefs1.htm#7"><SUP>7</SUP></A></P>

<P><SUP><TABLE BORDER=0 CELLSPACING=0 CELLPADDING=0>
   <TR>
      <TD WIDTH=563>
         <P ALIGN=right>Hyperlink to the International Association of
         Plant Taxonomy (IAPT)--&gt;</P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P><A HREF="http://bgbm3.bgbm.fu-berlin.de/IAPT/default.htm"><SUP><IMG SRC="iapt.gif" WIDTH=105 HEIGHT=96 ALIGN=bottom></SUP></A></P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
</TABLE>
 </SUP></P>

<P><B>Binomial nomenclature</B></P>

<P><B>Carl Linnaeus</B></P>

<P>The general stability of plant nomenclature derives from the
seminal works of the 18th century Swedish naturalist, Carl Linnaeus
(1707-1778) who introduced the consistent use of "binomial
nomenclature"<A NAME=Ref6></A><A HREF="botrefs1.htm#6"><SUP>6</SUP>
</A> in a series of works, but most significantly in the two-volume
first edition of <U>Species plantarum</U> (1753). The nomenclatural
scheme is sometimes called "Linnaean"
nomenclature.<A NAME=Ref6></A><A HREF="botrefs1.htm#6"><SUP>6</SUP>
</A></P>

<P>Botanical (and zoological) nomenclature identifies every organism
by the two names from the last two divisions of the taxonomic
hierarchy: genus and species. (e.g. <I>Homo sapiens</I> for human
beings). While the species is the basic unit of systematic botany, it
is not precisely defined. While a species is often thought of as a
group of plants that can interbreed, members of some species cannot
interbreed and other species are entirely asexual. In botanical
literature, the species name is followed by the name of the person
who first published that epithet. In '<I>Toxicodendron radicans
</I>(L.) O. Ktze', '(L.)' refers to Linnaeus who first applied the
epithet <I>radicans. </I>'O. Ktze' stands for Otto Kuntze who
transferred <I>radicans</I> into the genus <I>Toxicodendron</I>. The
generic and specific epithets comprise the 'minor categories of
nomenclature' (<A HREF="#table 1">Table 1</A>). Suprageneric groups
show natural relationships among plants and comprise the 'major
categories of nomenclature'. While genera may be shuffled between
major categories as discoveries dictate, plant names (minor
categories) can remain the same.</P>

<P><B>&nbsp;</B></P>

<P><B>Poison ivy, for example</B></P>

<P>It is occasionally necessary to alter the names of plants. Some
name changes occur because a plant was erroneously named to begin
with, e.g., the ICBN holds that the oldest name for a plant is the
correct name, and occasionally it is shown that a plant received a
name that was antedated by another name. Some name changes occur
because research has shown that what was formerly thought to be a
natural group is, in fact, two (or more) groups that are not closely
related to each other. As an example, the genus <I>Rhus</I> was once
thought to be a cohesive, widespread genus of many species. Common
poison ivy was traditionally included as <I>Rhus radicans</I> or even
<I>Rhus toxicodendron</I>.<A NAME=Ref9></A><A HREF="botrefs1.htm#9"><SUP>9</SUP></A>
Research in the 1950's and 1960's showed that poison ivy and its
immediate relatives represented a distinct developmental lineage (or
'clade' in the parlance of systematics) and should be treated not
within <I>Rhus&nbsp;</I>but as a distinct genus.<A HREF="botrefs1.htm#10"><SUP>10</SUP>
</A><SUP>, </SUP><A HREF="botrefs1.htm#11"><SUP>11</SUP> </A>
Application of the ICBN showed that the correct generic handle for
the poison ivies and their relatives was <I>Toxicodendron</I>, and
thus we now call common poison ivy <I>Toxicodendron radicans</I>.
'Toxicodendron' literally means 'poisonous tree' and had been used in
common parlance for many centuries. It is noteworthy that while the
nomenclatural scheme offers referable names for plants, it also
offers a clue to what is known of the natural relationships among
plants.</P>

<P><B>All in the family</B></P>

<P>Family names are largely stable, but a few large and widespread
families have alternative names, e.g., Asteraceae (the sunflower
family) is alternatively known as Compositae; Lamiaceae (the mint
family) and Brassicaceae (the mustard family) are known respectively
as Labiatae and Cruciferae. Their alternative names were used in
antiquity, and the ICBN permits their use in formal botany as a
concession to ancient tradition. Four more families complete the list
of seven families granted this indulgence by the IAPT: Palmae
(Arecaceae, the palm family), Gramineae (Poaceae, the grass family),
Leguminosae (Fabaceae, the pea family), and Umbelliferae (Apiaceae,
the parsnip family).<A NAME=Ref8></A><A HREF="botrefs1.htm#8"><SUP>8</SUP>
</A></P>

<P><B>Plant taxons</B></P>

<P>There is not quite a one-to-one correlation with the names of
major categories used in the past. For example, a few generations
ago, it was common to put all seed plants (i.e., the flowering
plants, conifers, cycads, and the ginkgo) into a single division
called 'Spermatophyta'. Botanists now agree that these are disparate
entities and are of different lineages. However, at another level,
botanical science has shown that the whole collection of vascular
plants (i.e., all of the seed plants plus the ferns and fern allies)
are allied with the bryophytes (mosses and liverworts) and that these
two groups are parallel in their relationships to the many groups of
algae (seaweeds, etc.), thus the Kingdom Plantae incorporates
vascular plants plus bryophytes, and it implies that the algae are
sister-groups.</P>

<P><A HREF="javascript:history.go(-1)"><IMG SRC="images/up3.gif" WIDTH=12 HEIGHT=12 BORDER=0 ALIGN=bottom></A><B><A NAME="Table 1"></A>Table
1</B>: <B>The basic nomenclatural scheme for plants using common
poison ivy as the example. The distinctive ending for each category
is underlined. Note that the minor categories of nomenclature have no
special endings. </B>(Author's name) (L.) O. Ktze</P>

<CENTER><TABLE BORDER=1 CELLSPACING=1 WIDTH="80%" bordercolor="#000000">
   <TR>
      <TD>
         <P>(The major categories)</P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>&nbsp;</P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>&nbsp;</P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD>
         <P><B>Kingdom </B></P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>Plantae</P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>(Metaphyta)</P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD>
         <P><B>Division </B>(Phylum of zoology)</P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>Magnolio<U>phyta</U></P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>(flowering plants)</P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD>
         <P><B>Class</B></P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>Magnoli<U>opsida</U></P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>(dicots)</P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD>
         <P><B>Subclass</B></P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>Ros<U>idae</U></P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>&nbsp;</P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD>
         <P><B>Order</B></P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>Sapind<U>ales</U></P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>&nbsp;</P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD>
         <P><B>Family</B></P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>Anacardi<U>aceae</U></P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>(the sumac or cashew family)</P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD>
         <P>(The minor categories)</P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>&nbsp;</P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>&nbsp;</P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD>
         <P><B>Genus </B></P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P><I>Toxicodendron</I></P>
      </TD>
      <TD>
         <P>&nbsp;</P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
   <TR>
      <TD HEIGHT=25>
         <P><B>Species</B></P>
      </TD>
      <TD HEIGHT=25>
         <P><I>radicans</I></P>
      </TD>
      <TD HEIGHT=25>
         <P>&nbsp;</P>
      </TD>
   </TR>
</TABLE>
</CENTER>

<P><B>Plant Identification</B></P>

<P>The accurate description of plants rests upon an elaborate
traditional terminology. Contemporary botanical terminology in turn
is derived from the scholarly Latin of the medieval university, and
it includes a rich vocabulary from classical Greek. The terminology
seems formidable until one has been introduced to it, but the payoffs
are evident, for it becomes possible to describe plants succinctly
with less chance of misunderstanding. Unfortunately, a working
knowledge of the terminology is needed to successfully use the plant
identification literature. Plant identification also assumes an
understanding that plants are highly variable (more so than animals)
and that adequate specimens are needed. Therefore, the following
suggestions and observations are offered:</P>

<P>1) Try to involve a botanist or horticulturist or other plant
person in the identification of plants if there is uncertainty. Every
U.S. state and most Canadian provinces have an established protocol
for routine and rapid plant identification, and usually the service
is <U>free</U>. The majority of plants that are submitted to these
agencies are weeds, or plants suspected of being weeds, but a notable
number are from toxicology laboratories, mostly associated with
veterinary medicine. In suburban and rural areas, the county or
regional agricultural extension service or farm advisors are
cognizant of the procedures for immediate plant identification, and
they have access to regional herbaria (plant information facilities,
involving extensive collections of specimens for reference). Urban
areas have similar services, usually accessed through the urban
horticulturist of the state extension service, or through the local
garden center or botanical garden.</P>

<P>2) Plant identification involves specimens. Herbaceous plants<B>
</B>(low-growing plants with fleshy stems as opposed to shrubs which
are low-growing plants with woody stems) should be collected in their
entirety (if possible) with their flowering and/or fruiting materials
intact. Note that "flowering" and "fruiting" are used in their
botanical senses here. Woody plants should be collected with about
two feet of the ends of the branch, with the leaves attached, and
with whatever flowering or fruiting materials may be at hand.
Herbaceous and woody plants may be pressed before submitting them for
identification, or they may be put into a plastic bag with <U>no</U>
<U>water</U> <U>added</U>, and then submitted with data on (a) where
that plant was collected, and (b) what the habitat was like
(cultivated in a garden, wild along a creek bank, in an open field,
in higher elevation woodlands, etc.). Identification of plants from
good specimens will increase the accuracy of the information received
from the botanist.</P>

<P>3) Plant identification from books or on-line schemes must be
approached cautiously, unless the parameters of the books or schemes
are well understood. The North American flora north of Mexico
includes some 15,000 species of vascular plants, of which the vast
majority and the most abundant are flowering plants. At this writing,
there is no single source of information on all of these plants
(however, a project centered at the Missouri Botanical Garden is at
work on the continental flora). In the United Kingdom, a CD-ROM
application entitled <I><CITE>Poisonous Plants in Britain and
Ireland</CITE></I> combines fast and accurate identification with a
friendly interface including photographic images of hundreds of
plants. <A NAME=Ref3></A><A HREF="botrefs1.htm#3"><SUP>3</SUP></A> It
includes 118 plants known to cause contact dermatitis.</P>

<P>There are numerous regional floristic works that account for all
the vascular plants in a region. These works and their equivalent
books for other regions are written by and for botanists, and they
employ traditional botanical terminology. However, they do account
for ALL of the plants growing wild in their respective regions. Books
that treat weeds or wildflowers or trees and shrubs are inadequate
for general plant identification, for the obvious reason that they
cover limited portions of the regional flora. Weed books, for
example, treat only those plants that are able to persist in places
of continual disturbance; wildflower books treat only herbs or
subshrubs that grow outside of cultivation and have showy flowers. In
addition, weed and wildflower books often derive much of their
interest from beautiful illustrations, which can be limiting to a
person trying to identify a plant in-hand, for the illustration,
particularly a photograph shows the plant only as it occurs at one
time in one place, whereas a written description accounts for the
latitude of variation in a plant.</P>

<CENTER><B>&nbsp;<TABLE BORDER=0 CELLSPACING=5 CELLPADDING=5>
   <TR>
      <TD BGCOLOR="#99FF66">
         <P><B>Advance to to next page: </B></P>
         
         <CENTER><A HREF="http://telemedicine.org/botanica/bot2.htm"><B>Contact
         Urticaria (toxin -mediated)</B></A><B> </B></CENTER>
      </TD>
      <TD BGCOLOR="#99FF66">
         <CENTER><A HREF="bot1.htm"><B>Return to the top of the
         page.</B></A></CENTER>
      </TD>
      <TD BGCOLOR="#99FF66">
         <CENTER><A HREF="http://telemedicine.org/toc2.html.htm"><B>Return
         to the Electronic Textbook of Dermatology table of
         contents.</B></A></CENTER>
      </TD>
   </TR>
</TABLE>
 </B>

<HR>

&copy; 1995-2000 The Internet Dermatology Society, Inc. All rights
reserved.<BR clear=left>
Send your comments to: <A HREF="mailto:textbook@telemedicine.org">textbook@telemedicine.org</A>

<HR>


</BODY>
</HTML>
 contentType 9 text/html url 44 http://telemedicine.org:80/botanica/bot1.htm responseCode 3 200 