lirckauclmhsggbspseqqcuslkhefcrgueaofomo length 5 39553 page 39553 <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01 Transitional//EN">
<html>
<head>
  <meta content="text/html; charset=ISO-8859-1"
 http-equiv="content-type">
  <title>The History of Akwesasne from Pre-Contact to Modern Times</title>
</head>
<body>
<table
 style="width: 80%; text-align: left; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;"
 border="0" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="2">
</table>
<div style="text-align: center;"><big> </big></div>
<table
 style="width: 80%; text-align: left; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;"
 border="0" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="2">
  <tbody>
  </tbody>
</table>
<div style="text-align: center;"><big> </big></div>
<table
 style="width: 80%; text-align: left; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;"
 border="0" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="2">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
<div style="text-align: center;"><big> </big></div>
<big> </big><big> </big>
<div style="text-align: center;"><big></big>
<table
 style="width: 80%; text-align: left; margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;"
 border="0" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="2">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td style="vertical-align: top;">
      <div style="text-align: center;"><big><big><big><big>The History
of Akwesasne <br>
      <small>from Pre-Contact to Modern Times</small></big></big></big></big><br>
      </div>
      <big><br>
      </big>
      <div style="text-align: center;"><big>by Darren Bonaparte</big><br>
      </div>
      <big><br>
      <br>
      </big>
      <div style="text-align: center;"><big><big>Introduction</big></big><br>
      </div>
      <big><br>
Akwesasne is Mohawk community that rightfully deserves the title,
"First Nation." While this community of about 12,000 has seen its share
of internal divisions and controversy in modern times, it started out
as a place of peace and a refuge for Mohawks and other natives weary of
war. Countless warships sailed through Akwesasne on their way from one
colonial battle to another, but somehow Akwesasne managed to survive
(and even prosper) while so many other native peoples in the Northeast
Woodlands dwindled away. From its humble beginning as the smallest
Mohawk community, it is now the largest, both in population and in
territory. The Haudenosaunee Confederacy considers Akwesasne the
"capital" of the seven communities that make up the Mohawk Nation.
Considering the tribulations we have faced throughout our history, this
is no small accomplishment.<br>
      <br>
      <br>
      </big>
      <div style="text-align: center;"><big><big>Ancient Akwesasne</big></big><br>
      </div>
      <big><br>
Although the Roman Catholic mission of St. Regis was established in
July of 1755, the territory of Akwesasne has long played a role in the
lives of the Mohawk people going back thousands of years before
Europeans explored the continent. It's Mohawk name translates as "place
of partridges" and was a reference to the abundance of the game bird
along the shores of the St. Lawrence and its tributaries. Mohawk and
other native peoples frequented the region to fish, hunt, and trade, as
evidenced by the diverse archaeological remains on the many islands and
mainland north and south of the river. Upriver from Akwesasne, natives
using the St. Lawrence were compelled to portage around the tumultuous
Long Sault Rapids. In times of war this provided enemies with a chance
to attack, but in times of peace it usually gave the weary traveler a
chance to camp, rest, fish, hunt or trade before continuing on.<br>
      <br>
Anthropologists and archaeologists have long debated the identity and
fate of the "St. Lawrence Iroquoians" that once built palisaded
longhouse villages found in the rich soil of the St. Lawrence River
Valley. When French explorer Jacques Cartier explored the St. Lawrence
in the 1500's, he visited a large village where the present-day city of
Montreal is now located. That village, and the people who populated it,
had disappeared by the time Samuel de Champlain made it to the area,
the result of epidemics or warfare with enemy nations. Archeological
evidence in Wyandot (Huron) country to the west and Iroquois country to
the southwest suggests that many of these "St. Lawrence Iroqouians"
were captured and adopted or sought refuge among these nations when the
weakened village of Hochelaga came to its mysterious end. Memories of
the Montreal area were so much a part of Mohawk oral tradition that for
a time many historians assumed that the Mohawks and the Hochelagans
were one and the same people, and that a massive migration occurred to
the Mohawk Valley in the years after the encounter with Cartier. What
is far more likely is that the Mohawks regularly headed to their
"northern frontier" to hunt, fish, and trade and came into direct
contact with the people living there. When the St. Lawrence Iroquoians
were dispersed, many of them sought refuge among the Mohawk.<br>
      <br>
      <br>
      </big>
      <div style="text-align: center;"><big><big>Trouble at the Eastern
Door</big></big><br>
      </div>
      <big><br>
Samuel de Champlain formed alliances with the Hurons and Algonquins to
establish a fur trading network in the New World that would reach the
Great Lakes. To solidify his alliance, he agreed to accompany the
Hurons and Algonquins in an attack on what were at the time their
mortal enemies, the Mohawks. This battle took place near what is now
Ticonderoga, New York, and was the Mohawks' first encounter with
Europeans and their arquebusses (firearms.) Three chiefs were shot and
killed by Champlain, and the terrified Mohawks fled with Champlain's
native allies in hot pursuit. The Mohawks never forgot this event and
it set the tone for French/Mohawk relations for many generations
afterward. Eventually the Mohawks and their confederation allies were
drawn into a war against the Hurons and Algonquins that dragged on for
years, broken up only by sporadic peace councils and wampum diplomacy.
Mohawk war parties swooped down on the Hurons as they tried to navigate
the rapids of the St. Lawrence with canoes packed full of furs destined
for Montreal. In time the mighty Huron Confederacy was broken by the
Iroquois, and many of their people were absorbed by the Iroquois or
scattered throughout the northeast. This turn of events probably would
not have occurred had the Iroquois not had access to the same deadly
weapons from the Dutch colonists coming up the Hudson River from the
south.<br>
      <br>
Peace with the French was established and missionary activity began
among the Iroquois, though not without a few rough starts. The presence
of Huron and Algonquin converts among the Iroquois gave the Jesuit
fathers an "in" with the Iroquois that they quickly seized. Soon they
had Mohawk converts as well as Huron and Algonquin. This led to
divisions and tensions within the Mohawk communities that resulted in a
new village being established where the Catholics could worship in
peace, once again in the Montreal area. In time more than half of the
Mohawk population (which had already been weakened by epidemics and
war) migrated to the village on the south bank of the St. Lawrence near
the Lachine Rapids. This village was named Kahnawake (at the rapids)
after the village from which they came in the Mohawk River Valley. They
were joined by Hurons, Algonquins, and other Iroquois converts from
Oneida and Onondaga. These former enemies solidified their peaceful
alliance with sacred wampum belts that still exist today.<br>
      <br>
      <br>
      </big>
      <div style="text-align: center;"><big><big>The Seven Nations of
Canada</big></big><br>
      </div>
      <big><br>
In time the population of these villages grew so large that new ones
were established. By the 1750's these villages eventually united in an
alliance that Mohawks knew as Tsiata Nihononwentsiake, also known as
the Seven Nations of Canada, the Seven Fires, and the Seven Villages.
When this union was formalized, it consisted of the Mohawks of
Kahnawake (Caughnawaga); the Mohawks, Algonquins, and Nippissings of
Kanesatake (Oka); the Abenakis of Odanak (St. Francis) in what is now
southern Quebec; the Hurons of Wendake (Lorette), just west of Quebec
City; and the Iroquois (mostly Oneidas and Onondagas) of Sawehkatsi
(Oswegatchie), site of present-day Ogdensburg, New York. Even though as
many as twenty-two different nations were represented at these new
settlements by the early 1700's, they were nevertheless able to
maintain a distinct cultural identification as Huron, Algonquin, and
Iroquois communities in their own right.<br>
      <br>
The cultural model of this new confederacy was the Rotinonsionni
("People of the Longhouse,") also known as the Haudenosaunee
Confederacy, the Five Nations, the Six Nations, and the League of the
Iroquois. As founding members, the Mohawks knew the workings of the
league and drew on its principles and structure to establish themselves
in a new political environment. Although the Jesuit priests still held
considerable political power among these Mohawks, they still maintained
their original clan system, wampum protocol, leadership customs, and
language, all of which was incorporated in the new alliance. Historians
in the past have assumed that the system of leadership was patterned
after the French noble system (that is, the chief's title passes to his
oldest son) but this may have been more out of convenience than out of
any French influence: a chief's oldest son was usually the
best-qualified to take over the role, having most likely served as the
chief's assistant for most of his life. Another misconception that
historians have passed down was that all of the Mohawks at the mission
villages were Christians. Some of them went to the new Kahnawake to be
closer to family and friends while still others went for the better fur
prices offered by the French. There is mention in historical accounts
of Kahnawake Mohawks getting into deep metaphysical debates with the
Jesuits over concepts such as heaven, hell, and the afterlife, even
after they had lived in the mission villages for years. Nor is it
accurate to say that the Jesuits purged all of the sacred ceremonies
from the Teieiahsontha Onkwe Onwe (literally, "the Forever People Who
Make the Sign of the Cross.") There is evidence that the "Praying
Indians" recited a variation of the "Thanksgiving Address," observed
the Strawberry, Seed, and Harvest ceremonies, and even acknowledged the
founder of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy, the Peacemaker, in one of
their hymns.<br>
      <br>
In modern times the Jesuit missionaries of long ago have become
scapegoats for the loss of our pre-contact culture. In some respects,
they must shoulder some of the blame, but in all fairness to the
Jesuits, their efforts to preserve and maintain the Mohawk language (by
translating and transcribing scripture, prayers and hymns into Mohawk)
and the traditional clan system (by refusing to marry people of the
same clan) may have been one of the reasons these aspects of our
culture are as strong as they are today. Accounts from the late 1800's
indicate that of all the Iroquois people still living in New York
State, the native language was the strongest at Akwesasne. To their
credit, the Jesuits never insisted that their converts learn a European
language or assimilate with the outside culture. Mission registers in
the late 18th and 19th centuries, for example, didn't even list
non-Mohawk family names when such names were known to exist.<br>
      <br>
No greater evidence of strong cultural persistence among the Seven
Nations exists than the twenty or so wampum belts held by museums in
Albany, New York City, Montreal, Ottawa, and Toronto. These were
purchased at Oka, Kahnawake, and other Seven Nations communities by
anthropologists and private collectors in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries. One in particular stands out among the collections of the
McCord Museum in Montreal. It is a purple belt with the same white
"path of peace" as the legendary "Ayonwatha Belt," only this one joins
seven "checkerboards" that were a favorite Huron wampum symbol for
communities. The symbolism thus invoked suggests that the "Great Law of
Peace" was extended to the Hurons and the Algonquins via the Mohawks of
Kahnawake, regardless of whatever political "separation" may have
occurred between themselves and those still living in the Mohawk River
Valley.<br>
      <br>
Kahnawake was the "Great Council Fire," or capital, of the Seven
Nations Confederacy, just as Onondaga was the "Central Fire" of the
Iroquois League. Kahnawake eventually became the central hub of an even
larger "confederacy of confederacies" that included the Wabanaki
Confederacy of New England and the Three Fires Confederacy of the Great
Lakes. Although the Haudenosaunee Confederacy has received the lion's
share of historical attention over the years, the influences of the
Seven Nations Confederacy were considerable in its day.<br>
      <br>
It was during this time that a type of trade began by which the Mohawks
near Montreal in the north and the Mohawks near Albany in the south
by-passed the trading restrictions established by the French and
English colonies. The northern and southern Mohawks helped each other
get around these restrictions to get better prices for their furs. This
cooperation extended into other areas. If they felt they weren't being
treated fairly by their respective colonial "allies," they would allow
the "enemy" Mohawks to raid a few white settlements for captives and
stir up a little fear. This made the English and French suspicious of
their Mohawk allies, but the alliances were maintained anyway. Neither
colony could risk alienating their native allies, as they held the
balance of power in North America with their vast networks of native
confederacies reaching deep into the continent.<br>
      <br>
      <br>
      </big>
      <div style="text-align: center;"><big><big>A New Community, A New
War</big></big><br>
      </div>
      <big><br>
It was only a matter of time that the many wars in Europe would spill
over to the North American theater, and the two native confederacies
were drawn into it on their respective French and English "sides." In
the final North American conflict between France and England, known as
the French and Indian War, Mohawk warriors once again drawn into
conflicts against their own people on battlefields such as Lake George,
Oswego, Niagara, and Ticonderoga. Military sources from both sides of
the war state that the Mohawks were reluctant to fight their own kin
and were mistrusted by their European allies. Nevertheless, Kahnawake
Mohawks are said to have killed the famous Mohawk Valley chief
Taiennoken (literally, "Between His Tracks,") also known as "King
Hendrick," as he staggered from the battlefield of Lake George in
September of 1755.<br>
      <br>
It was the onset of this war that prompted the move to Akwesasne and
the establishment of its first permanent village. It is mentioned in
the earliest written accounts that a factional dispute at Kahnawake led
to the establishment of a new community around 1754. Overcrowding, soil
exhaustion, and alcohol at Kahnawake were also given as reasons for the
move. The earliest traditions tell us that a faction led by the son of
an English captive made up the earliest migrants. Pierre (Peter)
Tarbell, or Karekohe ("It Is Going To War"), is the second name listed
in the old church registers; he was the son of either John or Zachariah
Tarbell, taken from Groton, Massachussetts in 1707. We may speculate
that because the Tarbells maintained ties to their biological New
England family and even visited them when tensions between the colonies
had eased, they may have been viewed with suspicion by the pro-French
Mohawks at Kahnawake, who were about to go to war against their
"Yangeese" kin. Whatever the case, it was very fortunate that they left
when they did, because epidemics swept through both Kahnawake and
Kanehsatake in 1755, killing hundreds.<br>
      <br>
This offshoot village, known to Mohawks as Akwesasne and the French as
Saint-Regis, was established where the Racquette and St. Regis Rivers
joined the St. Lawrence River near the 45th parallel. The French
government allowed the creation of this village in the hopes that it
would draw more Mohawks away from the Mohawk Valley and the strong
English influences there. Three or four families of no more than about
thirty people from Kahnawake came to Akwesasne with a priest, Father
Billiard (Biard) in the fall of 1754. Oral tradition at Akwesasne
suggests that there were already people here when this first Kahnawake
migration occurred; these people may have come from either the Mohawk
Valley or the Onondaga/Oneida mission at Oswegatchie, where an epidemic
had recently claimed numerous women and children. After spending the
winter in what is now Tsi sniahne, they crossed the St. Regis River in
the spring of 1755 and established a new village on the peninsula
formed by the St. Regis and St. Lawrence Rivers. The fledgling
community kept a low profile throughout the war, offering only a
handful of warriors to the French war effort. Eventually the war would
touch them personally, as the Abenaki village of Odanak was attacked
and destroyed by Roger's Rangers. The survivors eventually made their
way to Akwesasne where they were taken in as refugees.<br>
      <br>
      <br>
      </big>
      <div style="text-align: center;"><big><big>The Seven Nations Take
Hold of the Covenant Chain</big></big><br>
      </div>
      <big><br>
By 1760 the war was in its final stages with an inevitable British
victory on the horizon. Having conquered the French forts at Niagara
and Oswego, the English army and its Haudenosaunee allies began their
conquest of the St. Lawrence River. The Seven Nations of Canada had
sent peace envoys to meet with Sir William Johnson to promise their
neutrality as long as their villages were not attacked. He agreed, and
the former French allies became friends of the English. The British
army lost several men during their passage through the Long Sault
Rapids. Most of them then camped near what is now the city of Cornwall
while Johnson and 600 or so Iroquois (including a young Joseph Brant)
visited Akwesasne to smoke the pipe of peace with the Akwesasne
warriors. Ten of them agreed to accompany Johnson's men and helped
guide them through the rapids on their way to the conquest of Montreal.
Within days of the French capitulation a great peace council was held
at Kahnawake in which the Seven Nations and the Haudenosaunee
Confederacy buried the war hatchet and became allies once again.<br>
      <br>
Not long after that, a large number of Mohawks from the Mohawk Valley
moved to Akwesasne, free as it was from the encroachments of English,
Dutch, and German colonists that had pushed them from their former
homes at Skohare (Schoharie), Teiontontaroka (Fort Hunter), and
Kanatsiohare:ke (Canajoharie.) According to Philip Schuyler, an
American general writing in the era of the American Revolution, at
least 30 of the men who came up from the Mohawk Valley after the French
and Indian war later went on to fight on the side of the British when
the American Revolution broke out.<br>
      <br>
Even though they were now welcomed into the "Covenant Chain" (alliance)
with the English, the Seven Nations of Canada soon realized that the
English troops did not share the generous attitudes of Sir William
Johnson. He had promised protection of their lands and rights by
presenting them with a wampum belt, but they soon found that their
people were being fired upon as they paddled their canoes, their chiefs
were beaten up, and their fish and furs were confiscated by soldiers
assigned to the St. Lawrence and Lake Champlain outposts. Back at
Akwesasne, the Abenakis were overstaying their welcome, disrupting
Mohawk trapping lines and claiming that they were the original
proprietors of the territory. Akwesasne chiefs complained to Johnson
about the Abenakis and the white fur trader they had brought with them
from Odanak, and eventually their village was rebuilt so that they
could return home. According to oral tradition, some of the Abenakis
were allowed to stay behind and were absorbed into the Mohawk community.<br>
      <br>
      <br>
      </big>
      <div style="text-align: center;"><big><big>Drums Along the Mohawk</big></big><br>
      </div>
      <big><br>
With the former colony of New France under British rule, the
Haudenosaunee and Seven Nations Confederacies found themselves at the
mercies of the power that dominated North America. No longer could they
play one European power off the other to their own advantage. This
uneven playing field would not last indefinitely, however. England's
colonies were beginning to assert their independence as never before,
and soon began pushing through barriers the English had established
between native and non-native territory. White settlers attacked
peaceful Indian villages, killing indiscriminately, which led in turn
to reprisals that threatened to set the frontier ablaze. This
insatiable appetite for more Indian land was probably as much a driving
force behind the American Revolution as British tariffs ever were.<br>
      <br>
Like the French and Indian War that preceded it, the American
Revolution was politically divisive to the natives living in close
proximity to the British loyalists and American patriots. The Seven
Nations and Haudenosaunee Confederacies were asked to remain neutral in
the conflict, but efforts to recruit their warriors for both sides
began almost immediately. The majority chose either neutrality or the
English with only a few hundred Oneidas and Tuscaroras and a handful of
Kahnawake Mohawks actively supporting the Americans. Although many
started out as scouts and couriers, they were eventually drawn into
open hand-to-hand combat on the battlefields of Saratoga, Oriskany, and
Newtown, to name just a few. By war's end the Haudenosaunee Confederacy
was in tatters with most of their villages burned to the ground, many
of their leaders and young men dead, and their people living as
refugees far from home at Fort Niagara and elsewhere. The Seven Nations
of Canada came out of the war more or less intact, possibly due to the
greater distances between their communities and the Americans. The only
casualty was Oswegatchie, which was eventually destroyed by the
Americans. Her people eventually sought refuge at Akwesasne, as
evidenced by the numerous Snipe and Deer clan people living here today.
This infusion of people from Oswegatchie resulted in Akwesasne
inheriting Oswegatchie's territory (the Thousand Islands) and status as
one of the Seven Nations. (Previous to this, Akwesasne was considered
to be a sub-community of Kahnawake.)<br>
      <br>
The war had another major impact on Akwesasne with the drawing of an
international border directly through our territory. Located as it was
on the 45th parallel and the St. Lawrence River, Akwesasne soon found
itself "divided up" by the British and American governments and was
told that it would have no effect on day-to-day Mohawk lives.
Eventually this partitioning of our territory resulted in the loss of
lands and political autonomy. Another major impact of the war was the
settlement of British loyalists under Sir John Johnson (son of Sir
William Johnson) on the northern shores of the St. Lawrence at what is
now Cornwall, Ontario. When Akwesasne chiefs objected to white settlers
on their lands, they were told that since the French government had
never actually "granted" us the land or given us a written title, the
British government wasn't obligated to recognize our claim. Eventually
a compromise was worked out by which a strip of land (known as the
Nuttfield Tract) between the British settlements was reserved for
Akwesasne use, but the people of Akwesasne never forgot the
double-edged treachery: not only had our former French benefactors
failed to document our title, but now the son of the man who had
promised the protection of our lands in the 1760's was now denying that
those lands were even ours at all.<br>
      <br>
      <br>
      </big>
      <div style="text-align: center;"><big><big>The Burden of Peace</big></big><br>
      </div>
      <big><br>
Relations between the Seven Nations of Canada and the Haudenosaunee
Confederacy during the last decades of the 18th century were
contentious thanks to the mad rush of land sales and treaty
negotiations that stirred up old animosities and disputes over
territory. At one point a war almost broke out between the two
confederacies over land sales with New York. This was narrowly averted
by a peace council at Kahnawake in 1799. Relations were further
complicated by the threat of a new Indian war out of the Great Lakes,
promoted by the British to harass the Americans. Delegates from the
Seven Nations and Haudenosaunee Confederacies were asked by the United
States to promote peace among these nations, but it became apparent
that the western nations viewed those from the east as having "opened
the door" to the whites.<br>
      <br>
British and American animosity eventually resulted in the War of 1812.
Wisely, the Seven Nations of Canada and the Haudenosaunee Confederacy
insisted on maintaining neutrality in the conflict, having lost so much
by getting involved before. Once again this neutrality was impossible
to maintain as intense pressure was put on our men to serve on both
sides. In October of 1812, the village of St. Regis was the scene of a
battle between American and British forces in which a number of people
were killed and native homes were ransacked. The native contribution to
this war was considerable, but eventually it resulted in natives
killing natives, especially at the Battle of Chippawa on the Niagara
frontier in 1814. For Akwesasne, the divisions were on a much more
personal level: those that agreed to fight for the British found that
their homes had either been burned or taken over by those Akwesasne
Mohawks who had chosen neutrality or the American side. Eventually this
split between British and American factions resulted in two separate
reservations, each drawing on different annuities and rental moneys
that had previously been shared by the community as a whole. Membership
lists were drawn up that also corresponded to the division, and those
that ended up on the American side began to petition the outside
government for recognition of their own set of chiefs.<br>
      <br>
This era was one of great suffering for Akwesasne. A worldwide famine
occurred in 1816 when a volcanic eruption created a small-scale
"nuclear winter" that resulted in potatoes growing no larger than
walnuts. Smallpox, cholera, and tuberculosis also swept the area,
killing off hundreds of our people and leaving survivors in a weakened
state. Add to this the massive deforestation of the once mighty
timberlands in the region and Akwesasne in the 19th century emerges as
a wasteland of sorts, devoid of the very means of survival. It was
during this era that many people began to relocate for much of the year
and only returned to Akwesasne in the warmer seasons. A few Akwesasne
people had become farmers by this time and others found work as both
lumberjacks in the Adirondacks and as boatmen for the growing
non-native population. By the time the American Civil War broke out in
the mid-1800's, Akwesasne had become strong enough to allow many of her
young men to enlist. These men were refused at first for being Indian
(non-citizens) and had to travel as far as Massachusetts to enlist.
This war marked the end of separate "Indian companies" who decided
their own course of action. Henceforth, all native combatants in the
wars of the United States would serve as regular foot soldiers with the
other enlisted men. Gone were the days of all-Indian war parties
conducting guerrilla warfare at their own discretion.<br>
      <br>
The last decaded of the 19th century saw drastic changes in the
political landscape of Akwesasne and the other Mohawk communties, who
were still governed by the old "life chiefs." Non-native governments
began legislating away their existence by imposing elections on our
communities and doing away with the old clan-based system of choosing
leaders. At Akwesasne, the rejection of this new system of governance
led to confrontations at the polling booth. When armed police came to
help the Indian agent conduct an election in 1899, a group of Mohawks
disarmed them and physically removed them from the territory. Police
returned not long after to arrest the life chiefs, whom they considered
to be the instigators of the revolt. A Mohawk man, Jake Ice, was killed
when he rushed to the assistance of his brother, Chief Jake Fire. The
life chiefs sat in jail for over a year before charges were finally
dropped. Realizing that these elections weren't going away, they began
to offer their names up as candidates with the hopes that the old way
of doing things would eventually be restored.<br>
      <br>
      <br>
      </big>
      <div style="text-align: center;"><big><big>Akwesasne Takes on the
World</big></big><br>
      </div>
      <big><br>
In spite of these affronts to Mohawk cultural and political
sovereignty, the last half of the 19th century witnessed a cultural
renaissance of sorts at Akwesasne and her fellow Mohawk communities.
Mohawk baskets made of black ash splints and sweetgrass were becoming a
popular commodity to white visitors, sparking a "cottage industry" at
Akwesasne that thrives to this day. Native beadwork, snowshoes, and
cradleboards were also in demand. The native game of Tewaarathon (or
lacrosse) also attracted attention of the non-natives, thanks to a few
well-timed exhibition games in Montreal. Soon new leagues were
springing up and Mohawk players were in hot demand. Mohawks also found
a ready audience for trick riders and circus performers who toured the
world with "wild west" shows. By adapting their old ways to a new
world, Mohawks were able to prevent the total assimilation of our
people and the loss of cultural values that had "swallowed up" many
less fortunate native communities.<br>
      <br>
This era also saw the rise of another occupation for Mohawks in the
high-steel construction industry. This all began at Kahnawake, were
Mohawk men who had been hired as simple laborers on a railroad bridge
job began to scale the beams every chance they got to inspect the work.
Recognizing their lack of a fear of heights as the sign of natural born
steel workers, the construction company began training them for the
more dangerous jobs of connectors and rivet gangs. After a bridge
collapse killed 33 Mohawks in 1907, the Mohawk women made the
ironworkers promise to work on different jobs to prevent a whole
generation of women from turning into widows overnight. Soon Mohawk
ironworkers were "booming out" all over the United States and Canada,
working on the buildings, and bridges that are major landmarks today.
The Empire State Building, World Trade Center, Sears Tower, Golden Gate
Bridge, and CN Tower are just a few of the famous structures Mohawks
have helped to raise over the years. The high pay from construction
work resulted in an economic revival back home that also spilled over
to the political arena: chiefs were now able to travel to distant
cities to search through archives, hire lawyers, and fight for our
rights as never before thanks to advances in transportation and
communications.<br>
      <br>
Throughout the early 20th century the identification of the Mohawk
communities with the banner of the Seven Nations of Canada began to
wane in favor of that of the Haudenosaunee Confederacy, viewed by many
as older and purer of the two since it originated long before European
contact. Old ceremonies, legends, songs and dances began to make their
way from longhouses in Seneca country, Onondaga, and the Six Nations
reserve on the Grand River to Akwesasne, Kanesatake, and Kahnawake
where they were taken to heart. Soon there were longhouses and a small
but growing longhouse following in each of these communities and
political activism and nationalism on an unprecedented scale.<br>
      <br>
Another social phenomenon reestablished itself at Akwesasne in the
early part of the 20th century, thanks to the existence of the
U.S./Canadian border and the prohibition of alcohol in the United
States. Just as Mohawks were able to bypass colonial trading
restrictions in the late 17th and 18th centuries, they were now able to
make a handsome profit from transporting liquor from Canada to the
United States. This led to many confrontations and even gun battles
with customs inspectors and police officers in which Mohawks were
arrested or shot and killed. Mohawk elders recall the grim discovery of
gunshot victims floating in Akwesasne's waterways the morning after
such "enforcements."<br>
      <br>
Regardless of the whatever profit there may have been for those willing
to take the risk, being divided by an international boundary has almost
always posed hardships for our people. A native woman who married a man
from the opposite side of the border, for instance, lost her status as
an "Indian" while a non-native woman who married a native man "became"
one. "Canadian" Mohawks hoping to seek work in the U.S. were forbidden
to do so and were deported as illegal aliens until a court challenge in
the 1920's forced the U.S. to recognize our border-crossing rights as
protected by treaty. The fight to get Canada to recognize those rights,
meanwhile, has continued up until the present time and appears nowhere
near resolution.<br>
      <br>
The 1940's stand out as an important time for cultural revival at
Akwesasne, even though much of that decade was overshadowed by World
War II. It was in this era that an idealistic young schoolteacher, Ray
Fadden, came to Akwesasne to "kindle the fire" of Mohawk nationalism in
the youth by taking them on fieldtrips to Haudenosaunee historic sites,
teaching them about wampum belts, and publishing pamphlets and posters
that countered the negative image of natives in Hollywood westerns and
school textbooks. Many of his students have gone on to become the
traditional leaders of today.<br>
      <br>
The 1940's also saw the birth of Mohawk journalism with the publication
of Akwesasne's first newspaper, Kawehras! ("It Thunders!") by a young
Ernest Benedict, who later went on to establish Akwesasne Notes and the
North American Indian Travelling College in the late 1960's and early
70's. Among the news events Benedict covered was the resistance of many
Mohawks to accept the system of elections imposed by New York State on
the "American" side of Akwesasne. He reported that on May 24, 1948, a
vote was held in which "The Six Nations Chiefs" received 83 votes as
opposed to "The Elected Chiefs" who only got 1, and "The Seven Nations
Chiefs" who didn't get any. Even though the elected chiefs acknowledged
this vote of no confidence by stepping down, New York State and the
federal government refused to abide by it and continued to impose
elections.<br>
      <br>
      <br>
      </big>
      <div style="text-align: center;"><big><big>Dam Nation</big></big><br>
      </div>
      <big><br>
Halfway through the century construction began on the massive system of
navigation locks and hydro-electric power dams known as the St.
Lawrence Seaway. This project, which helped to make the United States
and Canada the economic superpowers they are today, had the opposite
effect on Akwesasne. Not only did we lose parts of our shoreline and
entire islands beneath the rising waters, but it disrupted spawning
patterns of fish and greatly reduced the oxygen levels in the water.
Drawn by cheaper utility rates, three major industrial plants set up
shop upriver and upwind of Akwesasne, contaminating both the river,
air, and soil with toxic chemicals that affected the fishing, farming,
and health of the community as years went by. This forced the Mohawks
of Akwesasne to unify in their efforts to demand remediation. Our
environmental efforts, the first of their kind and scope in a Native
American community, have since become the model for many other
international environmental studies and has served as a unifying force
for the much-divided community.<br>
      <br>
Throughout the last decades of the 20th century, Akwesasne continued to
feel the long-term effects of the St. Lawrence Seaway. As the
agricultural and fishing base began to decline, a majority of Mohawk
men sought work in construction far from home, taking their families
with them or starting new ones where they ended up. Others sought
careers at the various factories close by and in cities like Syracuse
and Buffalo, New York. While this may have improved the economic
situation for individual families, in some circumstances it served to
increase the pressures of cultural assimilation and alienation.<br>
      <br>
Weary of a life in perpetual transit, a few Mohawk entrepreneurs began
selling tax-free gasoline and cigarettes to native and non-native
customers along Akwesasne's main thoroughfare, Route 37. The
commercialization of these hard-won treaty rights has been
controversial since gas stations and smoke shops began to proliferate
in the 1980's, followed by high-stakes bingo and casinos that further
divided the community at the same time as they brought much-needed jobs
to the area. In the shadow of these much-publicized events, a web of
international smuggling networks began to spring up on the highways and
waterways that pass through Akwesasne, complete with hijackings,
murders, nightly gun battles, and corrupt law enforcement officers.
Relations between the elected and traditional councils were already
strained by generations of ideological differences; the influx of fast
cash and a materialistic lifestyle brought on by the new "economy" only
heightened those differences. These internal conflicts have erupted in
just about every Iroquois community since the 1980's, setting back our
efforts to rebuild our nations and make them strong in the face of
mounting external pressures.<br>
      <br>
Today, it may seem to the outsider that Akwesasne is nowhere nearer to
a solution to these fundamental differences in philosophy. But it is
hoped that the revival in interest in our unique history and cultural
heritage will help to make Akwesasne Mohawks aware of the great
difference the "path of peace" has made in our ancestors' lives and
become a unifying force for the future. That path has become encumbered
by weeds of late, but there is still time to clear the way for the
generations yet to come. </big></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
<big><br>
</big></div>
<div style="text-align: center;"><big>
</big>
<div
 style="text-align: center; font-family: times new roman,times,serif; color: rgb(0, 0, 0); background-color: rgb(255, 255, 255);"><big></big>
<div style="text-align: center; font-style: italic;"><big>If
you&#8217;ve
arrived at this page from a search engine,<br>
</big></div>
<big style="font-style: italic;">click
graphic below to visit the Wampum Chronicles homepage.
</big><big><br>
</big></div>
<big><br style="color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">
<br style="color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">
<a href="http://www.wampumchronicles.com/"><img
 alt="The Wampum Chronicles"
 src="http://www.wampumchronicles.com/wampumicon.jpg"
 style="border: 0px solid ; width: 300px; height: 185px;"></a></big></div>
</body>
</html>
 contentType 9 text/html url 47 http://www.wampumchronicles.com:80/history.html responseCode 3 200 