vsvkeehqqsakwqlgacxkuqusgiucbsgsuabgxaik length 5 14008 page 14008 <!--This file created 1:22 PM  8/10/97 by Claris Home Page version 2.0-->
<html>
<head>






<!-- End Wayback Rewrite JS Include -->

   <title> Pimbley's Dictionary of Heraldry - E</title>
   <meta name="GENERATOR" content="Namo WebEditor v5.0(Trial)">
   <x-sas-window top="0" bottom="339" left="0" right="628">
</head>
<body bgcolor="white" link="#CC0000" alink="#6F0000" vlink="#CC0000" text="black">

<h2>Pimbley's Dictionary of Heraldry - E</h2>

<p><strong>Eagle</strong> - The eagle plays an important part in
heraldry in almost every part of the globe. Its earliest rise to
popularity, however, was in Germany, where, after it became the
emblem of the empire, it was adopted by some of the princes and many
of the nobles. A double-headed eagle is also the emblem of Russia and
Austria. On the roll of Henry III the eagle appears but twice, but in
the roll of Edward II there are forty-three examples of it. Nobles of
the Holy Roman Empire place their shields on the breast of an eagle,
examples of which may be seen in the arms of the Duke of Marlborough
, the Earl of Denbigh and Lord Arundel of Wardour.</p>

<p>The imperial eagle is invariably represented as two-headed, the
origin of which is obscure. Charlemagne is said to have used it to
signify that in his hands was the government of both the Roman and
the German empires.</p>

<p>The eagle is generally borne displayed; that is, upright, breast
to the front, and legs, tail and wings expanded (commonly called a
&quot;spread eagle&quot;).</p>

<p>The Bald Eagle, adopted as the national emblem of the United
States, is a large and powerful bird, with a far greater spread of
wing than the European white-tailed species.</p>

<p><strong>Eared</strong> - Applied to animals borne with the ears of
a different color from that of the body. In such a case the animal is
said to be &quot;eared of&quot; such a color or metal. <strong>Earl</strong> -
The title of an English noble, the third in rank, coming next below a
marquis.</p>

<p>EARL'S CORONET - The head attire of an earl, sometimes used in
blazonry. The crest of Davidson in Carlisle Cathedral shows a bird
rising out of an earl's coronet. This is unusual, however. Generally
a ducal coronet is used.</p>

<p>EARL MARSHAL - An English office of great antiquity, and is now
hereditary with the Dukes of Norfolk. The Earl Marshall is the head
of the College of Arms, which institution determines all questions
relating to arms and grants of armorial bearings.</p>

<p>EARL MARSHAL'S COURT - An institution formerly existing in
England, presided over by the Earl Marshal, in which all questions
and disputes concerning coats of arms were settled. It has since been
abolished.</p>

<p><strong>Edged</strong> - Applied to an ordinary to denote that the
edging is placed only between the ordinary and the field, and not
where it joins the escutcheon.</p>

<p><strong>Effare</strong> - (af-fa'-ray) [French.] Said of an animal
when represented as rearing on its hind legs from fright or rage.
</p>

<p><strong>Eight-foil</strong> - A grass that has eight leaves. [See
OCTOFOIL.]</p>

<p><strong>Elevated</strong> - Applied to the wings of a bird when
upright and expanded.</p>

<p><strong>Embattled</strong> - Indented like a battlement.</p>

<p>The notch in a parapet is called an <em>embrazure</em>, and the
intermediate piece of masonry a <em>merlon</em>. When a second and
smaller merlon is placed on the first the battlement is said to be
<em>stopped</em>.</p>

<p>EMBATTLED COUNTER-EMBATTLED - Embattled on both faces of the
ordinary.</p>

<p>EMBATTLED GRADY - One embattlement upon another.</p>

<p><strong>Emblazon</strong> - To blazon; to place and arrange
figures armorial.</p>

<p><strong>Emblazoner</strong> - One who blazons.</p>

<p><strong>Emblazonment</strong> - The act or art of blazoning;
blazonry.</p>

<p><strong>Emblazonry</strong> - Heraldic representations or
decorations.</p>

<p><strong>Embordered</strong> - (-bor'-derd) Having a border of the
same tincture as the field.</p>

<p><strong>Embordured  </strong>-)-bor'-durd) The same as EMBORDERED.
</p>

<p><strong>Embowed</strong> - (-bow'd) Bent or bowed.</p>

<p><strong>Embraced</strong> - Braced together; bound or tied
together.</p>

<p><strong>Embrazure</strong> - [See EMBATTLED.]</p>

<p><strong>Embroidery</strong> - A term applied to a hill or mount
with several copings or rises and falls.</p>

<p><strong>Embrued</strong> - (-brud') Said of the mouths of beasts
when bloody from devouring their prey; also applied to a weapon
represented as covered or sprinkled with blood.</p>

<p><strong>Emerald</strong> - Green. [See VERT.]</p>

<p><strong>Empaled</strong> - (-paled') This is a term used to
describe a shield in which coats of arms are placed side by side,
each occupying one-half the escutcheon. The shield is divided by a
line down the center (per pale). The arms of the husband are placed
on the dexter side, and those of the wife on the sinister.</p>

<p><strong>Empalement</strong> - Two coats of arms placed on a shield
palewise..</p>

<p><strong>Enaluron</strong> - (en-a-lu'-ron) Applied to a bordure
charged with eight birds.</p>

<p><strong>Enarched</strong> - Arched.</p>

<p><strong>Enarmed</strong> - Represented with horns, hoofs, etc., of
a different color from that of the body.</p>

<p><strong>Enclave</strong> - (in-kla've) [French.] Anything which is
represented as let into something else, particularly when the bearing
so let in is square.</p>

<p><strong>Endorse</strong> - One of the diminutives of the pale,
being one-eighth the breadth of that ordinary. The endorse is used
only in pairs - one on each side of the pale. This subordinary, like
the pallet, was unknown in ancient heraldry.</p>

<p><strong>Endorsed</strong> - A pale having an endorse on each side.
</p>

<p><strong>Enfiled</strong> - Used to describe a sword drawn as
transfixing the head of a man or animal, a coronet or other object.
</p>

<p><strong>Englante</strong> - (an-glan'-tay) [French.] Bearing
acorns or something similar.</p>

<p><strong>Englislet</strong> - (eng'-lis-let) An escutcheon of
pretense.</p>

<p><strong>Engoulee</strong> - (an-goo'-lay) An epithet applied to a
bend, cross, saltire, etc., when the ends enter the mouths of lions,
tigers or other animals.</p>

<p><strong>Engrail</strong> - (-grail') To indent in curved lines; to
make ragged at the edges; to spot as with hail.</p>

<p><strong>Engrailed</strong> - Indented in a series of curves.</p>

<p>This is applied to one of the partition lines, as well as to some
bends, etc.</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&quot;Polwheel beareth a saultier engrailed.&quot; - <em>Carew</em>.</p>

<p><strong>Engrailment</strong> - The state of being engrailed or
indented in curved lines.</p>

<p><strong>Enhanced</strong> - (en-hansd') Applied to an ordinary
when removed from its proper position and placed higher up in the
field.</p>

<p><strong>Enleve</strong> - (an-lev'-e') [French.] Raised or
elevated.</p>

<p><strong>Enmanche</strong> - (an-man'-shay) [French.] Covered with
or resembling a sleeve. Said when the chief has lines drawn from the
center of the upper edge to the sides to about half the breadth of
the chief. [MAUNCH.]</p>

<p><strong>Enraged</strong> - In a leaping posture. It is sometimes
used to describe the position of a horse which in the case of other
animals would be saliant.</p>

<p><strong>Ensign</strong> - To distinguish by a mark or ornament,
such as a crown, coronet, mitre, etc. A bishop, for instance, ensigns
his arms with a mitre.</p>

<p>Prelates of the Roman Catholic Church ensign their shields with a
hat, the tassels of which indicate their rank. A cardinal has four
rows of red tassels, an archbishop four rows of green tassels, a
bishop has three rows and an abbot two, the latter's hat being black.
Prelates and legates place a patriarchal cross in pale behind their
shield.</p>

<p>A staff is sometimes said to be ensigned with a flag.</p>

<p><strong>Ensigned</strong> - [See ENSIGN.]</p>

<p><strong>Ente</strong> - (an-tay') [French.] Applied to an
engrafted emblazonment. (Also written antï¿½.)</p>

<p><strong>Entoured</strong> - (en-toord&quot;) Said of a shield decorated
with branches.</p>

<p><strong>Entwined</strong> - The same as ENVELOPED.</p>

<p><strong>Entwisted</strong> - The same as ENVELOPED.</p>

<p><strong>Enurny</strong> - (en-ur'ny) A term used to describe a
bordure charged with eight animals of any kind.</p>

<p>When birds are used <em>enalurion</em> is the proper term.</p>

<p><strong>Enveloped</strong> - Applied to charges around which
serpents are entwined. Also used in the case of laurel or other
plants.</p>

<p><strong>Environed</strong> - (-vi'-rond) Encircled; bound round or
about.</p>

<p><strong>Erased</strong> - (e-ras'd) A term applied to the head of
an animal or other bearing having the appearance of being forcibly
torn off, leaving jagged or uneven ends.</p>

<p>Erased is the opposite of <em>couped</em>, the latter meaning cut
off even, straight.</p>

<p><strong>Eradicated</strong> - A tree torn up by its roots.</p>

<p><strong>Ericius</strong> - [See HEDGEHOG.]</p>

<p><strong>Ermelin</strong> - [See ERMINE.]</p>

<p><strong>Ermine</strong> - (er'-min) One of the furs used in
blazoning, representing the skin of the little animal of that name. A
field of ermine is white with black spots of a particular shape.</p>

<p>The animal ermine is scarcely known in heraldry, although its fur
is widely borne.</p>

<p><strong>Ermines</strong> - The reverse of Ermine, being white
spots on a black field. (Sometimes described as counter-ermine.)</p>

<p><strong>Erminites</strong> - (er-min'-ites) The same as Ermine,
but with one red hair on each side of the ermine spots.</p>

<p><strong>Erminois</strong> - (er'-min-wa) The same as Ermine,
except that the field is gold and the spots black.</p>

<p><strong>Escarbuncle</strong> - (es'-kar-bun-k'l) A charge or
bearing supposed to represent the precious stone carbuncle, being a
cross of eight rays set with knobs and the arms ending in
fleur-de-lis. In another representation of this bearing the ends are
connected by cross-bars. (Also called Carbuncle.)</p>

<p><strong>Escallop</strong> - (es-kol'-up) The figure of a scallop
shell. THis was originally worn to signify that the wearer had made a
pilgrimage to the shrine of St. James, Compostella, Spain. Later on
it was placed on the shield to show that the bearer or an ancestor
had been a Crusader or had made a long pilgrimage.</p>

<p><strong>Escallopee</strong> - (se-kol'-lo-pay) [French.] An
escutcheon or a bearing which is covered with curved lines resembling
scallop shells. These lines should represent the lines as overlapping
each other.</p>

<p><strong>Escalloped</strong> - (es-kol'-oped) The same as
ESCALLOPEE.</p>

<p><strong>Escartel</strong> - (es-kar'-tel) To cut or notch in a
square form or across.</p>

<p><strong>Escartelee</strong> - (-kar'-tel-ï¿½e) Cut or notched
in a square form or across.</p>

<p><strong>Esclatte</strong> - (es-klat'-ty) A term applied to
anything shivered by a battle axe.</p>

<p><strong>Escrol</strong> - (es-krol') The same as SCROLL.</p>

<p><strong>Escutcheon</strong> - (es-kuch'-un) The shield, on which
all lines are drawn and charges delineated; the background on which
coat armor is represented; known in blazon as the field. It
originally represented the war shield of a knight, upon which his
arms were displayed.</p>

<p>ESCUTCHEON OF PRETENSE - A small shield bearing the arms of an
heiress placed in the center of her husband's shield, instead of
being impaled with his arms.</p>

<p><strong>Escutcheoned</strong> - (es-kuch'-und) Having a coat of
arms; supplied with an escutcheon; placed in an escutcheon.</p>

<p><strong>Esquire</strong> - Formerly an armor bearer or attendant
upon a knight.</p>

<p><strong>Essorant</strong> - (es'-so-rant) Said of a bird
represented with its wings half open, as if preparing to take flight.
</p>

<p><strong>Estoile</strong> - (es'-twal) [French.] A star with six
wavy points. It is different from a mullet , the later having only
five points, and these are straight.</p>

<p><strong>Estoilee</strong> - (es'-twal-ee) [French.] A star with
four long rays in the form of a cross, tapering from the center to
the points. (Also called a <em>Cross Estoilï¿½e</em>.)</p>

<p><strong>Extendant</strong> - (ex-tend'-ant) The same as DISPLAYED.
(Wings extended.)</p>

<p><strong>Eyed</strong> - A term made use of in speaking of the
spots in a peacock's tail.</p>

<p><strong>Eyrant</strong> - (i-rant) Applied to eagles or other
birds in their nests.</p>

<p> <b><a href="/web/20070629120236/http://www.luz-herald.net/free/lettres.html"><font color="#EC2E00" size="5">Back to Index</font></a></b></p>

<p align="center"><a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20070629120236/http://www.houseofnames.com/?a=54323-177"><img height="109" alt="Find Your Family Name Coat of Arms" src="/web/20070629120236im_/http://www.luz-herald.net/images/banner/button2_aff.jpg" width="145" border="0"><br><font face="Verdana, Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif"><small><small>Search for Coats of 
Arms &amp; Surname Histories including FREE descriptions of over 800,000 coats 
of arms!</small></small></font></a><font face="Verdana, Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif"><a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20070629120236/http://www.houseofnames.com/?a=54323-177">
            </a></font></body>
</html>
<!--
     FILE ARCHIVED ON 12:02:36 Jun 29, 2007 AND RETRIEVED FROM THE
     INTERNET ARCHIVE ON 10:43:45 Apr 28, 2024.
     JAVASCRIPT APPENDED BY WAYBACK MACHINE, COPYRIGHT INTERNET ARCHIVE.

     ALL OTHER CONTENT MAY ALSO BE PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT (17 U.S.C.
     SECTION 108(a)(3)).
-->
<!--
playback timings (ms):
  captures_list: 7.775
  exclusion.robots: 0.479
  exclusion.robots.policy: 0.455
  cdx.remote: 0.157
  esindex: 0.018
  LoadShardBlock: 130.793 (3)
  PetaboxLoader3.datanode: 61.471 (4)
  PetaboxLoader3.resolve: 173.989 (3)
  load_resource: 156.641
--> contentType 9 text/html url 138 https://web.archive.org:443/web/20070629120236/http://www.luz-herald.net/free/pimbley/Pimbley%27s%20Dictionary%20of%20Heraldry%20-%20E.htm responseCode 3 200 