sewoisxqxezqsaxijomgmoisgsakkeconejmogwg length 5 15245 page 15245 <html>

<head>
<title>Purdah</title>
</head>

<body BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">

<h4><a HREF="http://www.kings.edu/womens_history">Women's History Resource Site </a></h4>

<h4><a HREF="http://departments.kings.edu/history">King's College History Department</a></h4>

<hr SIZE="4">

<h2 ALIGN="CENTER">Purdah</h2>

<p>In the lands of India the actual translation of the word purdah is screen or veil.
Purdah is the practice that includes the seclusion of women from public observation by
wearing concealing clothing from head to toe and by the use of high walls, curtains, and
screens erected within the home. Purdah is practiced by Muslims and by various Hindus,
especially in India. The limits imposed by this practice vary according to different
countries and class levels. Generally, those women in the upper and middle class are more
likely to practice all aspects of purdah because they can afford to not work outside the
home.</p>

<p>Purdah probably developed in Persia and later spread to Middle Eastern lands.&nbsp;
Purdah flourished in ancient Babylon. No woman could go outside unless masked and
chaperoned by a male from the family. Even parts of the household were separated as a
practice of segregation. The ancient Assyrian women also had to remain inside behind
curtains where darkness and little breeze prevailed. In the 7<sup>th</sup> century A.D.,
during the Arab conquest of what is now Iran, the Muslims probably adapted the idea of
purdah to their religion. The Prophet Muhammad reintroduced the custom as part of the
Islamic tenets of faith. As time went by the laws associated with purdah became more
severe. During the British domination in India, the observance of purdah was very strictly
adhered to and widespread among the Muslims. </p>

<p>Some critics see purdah as an evil influence that has only suffocated the rights of
women and perpetuated male chauvinism. They point towards the Muslims in India who have
shut off women from the outside world in order to make them ignorant of the practicalities
of life. To them it has deprived the woman of economic independence and forces these
females to produce chauvinistic boys and submissive girls. In order to keep females
submissive, women know only what their fathers, husbands, and sons want them to know.
Critics see women who practice purdah as having no voice or free will. </p>

<p>Others, mostly believers in Islam, see purdah as a very positive and respectful
practice that actually liberates women. It is viewed as liberating because it brings about
an aura of respect. Women are looked at as individuals who are judged not by their
physical beauty but by their inner beauty and mind. By covering themselves, women are not
looked at as sex objects that can be dominated. For the Muslims, purdah is an act of faith
that entails the acts of honor, respect, and dignity. Islam exalts the status of women by
commanding that women should enjoy equal rights with men and remain on the same footing as
them. When a woman covers herself she places herself on a higher level and allows men to
see and respect her for her intellect, faith, and personality. The physical person is to
play no role in social interaction. </p>

<p>The role of purdah in any culture has become more controversial since the rise of the
women's movement. Purdah has almost disappeared in the Hindu practice and is practiced to
greater and lesser degrees in many of the Islamic countries. Either way the practice of
purdah is looked at, whether in a negative or positive light, it stills remains an
integral part of everyday life for some peoples and marks a part of their culture. </p>

<hr>
<font SIZE="4"><b>

<p ALIGN="CENTER">Annotated Bibliography</p>
</b></font>

<p><br>
Abraham, Vinu. &quot;Unveiling the Purdah.&quot; March 01, 1998. <a
HREF="http://www.the-week.com/98mar01/life7.htm"><font SIZE="2">http://www.the-week.com/98mar01/life7.htm</font></a>
(November 13, 1998). </p>

<p>This website posts weekly articles on life in India. This article focuses on the
current trend of Indian women to wear purdah gowns for non-religious reasons. Women are
beginning to wear them because of their low cost, and in order to avoid the pestering of
men in public places. Discussed is the progressive view that this new fad conceals a
religious chauvinism that spells danger for Muslim womanhood. This site provides useful
information on social issues in current India and shows some of the positives and
negatives of purdah.</p>

<p>Ahmed, Leila. <u>Women and Gender in Islam: Historical Roots of a Modern Debate</u>.
New Haven, C.T.: Yale University Press, 1992. </p>

<p>The author of this book presents the discourse on the conditions of the lives of women
in Middle Eastern history plus the recent findings on the history of these same women.
This discourse includes the reasons for purdah and its place in the modern world. The book
is divided into three parts, the pre-Islamic Middle East, founding discourses, and new
discourses. The section that details the discourse on the wearing of the veil identifies
the differences between Middle Eastern cultures and Western views on their culture. It
criticizes the view of the West as liberator and Islam as the oppressor. This book is very
useful in looking at the reasons for purdah through the female Islamic view. </p>

<p>Anonymous. &quot;Purdah-Seclusion-in Pakistan.&quot; <u>Women's International Network
News</u>, 20 (Spring 1994): 33. </p>

<p>This article focus is on the practice of purdah in Pakistan, which discriminates
against women and violates their human rights. Purdah is a means to segregate women from
society. The article describes purdah as jail and shows the negatives of the practice. It
provides the viewpoint of one Pakistan woman who is against the idea of purdah. </p>

<p>Anonymous. &quot;The Issue of Muslim Veiling Is Sexism: France.&quot; <u>Women's
International Network News</u>, 16 ( Winter 1990): 69. </p>

<p>This article comes from an incident that brought about a national debate on the veiling
of women. In the suburbs of Paris two Muslim students were ordered by the principal to
remove the veils that they wore because of their practice of strict Muslim laws. Some saw
the veil as a humiliating dress for women. Although it was decided that the women were
allowed to wear their veils it brought about a great debate in the West. This shows what
can happen when two cultures clash. </p>

<p>Anonymous. &quot;Purdah-The Seclusion of Women.&quot; January 15, 1998. <a
HREF="http://foundation.novartis.com/purdah.htm"><font SIZE="2">http://foundation.novartis.com/purdah.htm</font></a>
(November 13, 1996). </p>

<p>This short article sympathizes with the poverty stricken Muslim women in Bangladesh who
are forced to earn a living within the restrictions imposed by their religious culture.
The view of purdah is that women should not leave the home to work. The article contends
that practicing purdah earns high social and religious prestige but only the more affluent
can afford to strictly practice it. Those in society who are poor therefore do not earn
the same respect. The article shows the great difference in female and male wages because
of the purdah practice. </p>

<p>Chopra, Sehmina. &quot;Learning About Islam: Liberation by the Veil.&quot; March 03,
1998. <br>
<a HREF="http://www.al-islam.org/about/contributions/liberationbytheveil.html"><font
SIZE="2">http://www.al-islam.org/about/contributions/liberationbytheveil.html</font></a>
(November 13, 1998). </p>

<p>The author of this article takes a supportive role for the practice of purdah. She
takes the view of the veil as being a liberating experience. She uses quotes from the holy
Koran in presenting her point. The author does deny the previous use of the veil so as to
oppressive women. However, she points out true reason for the veil as a source of identity
and faith. </p>

<p>Levy, Reuben. <u>The Social Structure of Islam</u>. Cambridge: The Syndics of the
Cambridge University Press, 1965. </p>

<p>This author takes a traditional look at the Muslim religion. The main purpose of it is
to look at the effects of the religious system of Islam on the daily life practices and
structure of those who believe in it. The section devoted to the how the religion of Islam
effects women's' role in society discusses purdah briefly. The book is useful in
chronicling the treatment of women in Islamic countries and how it has changed from the
past into the mid 20<sup>th</sup> century. </p>

<p>Mernissi, Fatima. <u>The Veil and the Male Elite</u>. New York, N.Y.: Addison-Wesley
Publishing Co., 1987. </p>

<p>The author of this book, as a female Muslim, offers up the idea that the denial of
women's rights in Islamic society does not come from the Koran, sayings of Muhammad, or
tradition but from those who see these rights conflicting with the interests of the male
elite. She denounces those who see the fight for women's rights in Islamic society as a
move towards Westernization. The idea of purdah is looked at through the context of the
society. The book stresses that purdah does not promote the idea that women have not had
important roles in the development of Muslim society. Although her writing is somewhat
biased because of her strong feelings the book offers the importance of Islamic women and
their influence. </p>

<p>Mustikhan, Ahmar. &quot;Women's woes under Islam.&quot; <u>The World and I</u>,
February 1998, 54-59. </p>

<p>This article begins by detailing a number of the strict Muslim laws that only apply to
women. Its purpose is to present both sides of the debate on the limitation of rights for
these women. It provides the liberal view, justification for women's fewer rights, and the
controversy over theology. The liberal side does like the idea that some women wear purdah
clothing in the workplace while the conservative side does not see the practice of purdah
as restrictive towards women. The article provides a thorough look at the many
implications of purdah for women who practice it. </p>

<p>Nanji, Azim, ed. <u>The Muslim Almanac</u>. New York, N.Y.: Gale Research Inc., 1996. </p>

<p>This book is a reference work on the peoples, culture, faith, and history of the
Muslim. The general audience is almost anyone and it contains a brief description of
everything you would ever want to know about the Muslims. Purdah is described as a system
of gender segregation. The subject of purdah is looked at in a very objective manner,
showing that it is part of the Muslim culture and tradition. Overall, this book is a good
source for a brief look at purdah along with how it plays an important role in the culture
of many people. </p>

<p>Paul, B.K. &quot;Female Activity Space in Rural Bangladesh.&quot; <u>Geographical
Review</u>, January 1992, 1-12. </p>

<p>The author of this article analyzes female space in the context of purdah, the
patriarchal family structure, and the organization of rural settlements in Bangladesh.
Discussed is the idea that purdah is used as an instrument that enables men to dominate
over the family structure and causes a division of labor by gender that leaves women
extremely dependent upon their husbands. The article also views purdah as a symbol of
social status for rural families since the richer families most strictly practice it. This
article is very useful in showing the divisiveness that purdah causes in society. </p>

<p>Shaikh, Anwar. &quot;Islam and Womanhood.&quot; June 16, 1998. <br>
<a HREF="http://www.hindutva.org/AnwarShaikh/Islam/IslamWoman1.html"><font SIZE="2">http://www.hindutva.org/AnwarShaikh/Islam/IslamWoman1.html</font></a>
(November 13, 1998). </p>

<p>The author of this article identifies what he sees as the three components, which the
Prophet Muhammad used to perpetuate, man's control over woman. The three components are
purdah, man's right to divorce at will, and polygamy. The section on purdah starts out
with origins of purdah and its spread to the Muslims. The author then continues by quoting
passages from the <i>Koran</i> and showing how purdah still adversely effects women. <br>
&nbsp; </p>

<p>Utas, Bo, ed. <u>Women in Islamic Societies</u>. New York, N.Y.: Olive Branch Press,
1983. </p>

<p>This book is a culmination of the many different views on historical perspectives and
social attitudes of the Islamic treatment of women. It is the actual selection of papers
that were written during and for a conference on 'Women in Islam' held in November of
1997. While it covers a multitude of topics some articles focus on the continued seclusion
of Muslim women in society. There is a discussion of how this constant seclusion is not
harmful. There are other formats, like poetry, where women reveal their voices. The value
is very helpful in voicing the many different points of view of women and their solutions
for the treatment of Muslim women. </p>

<p>Walther, Wiebke. <u>Women in Islam</u>. New York, N.Y.: Markus Wiener Pub., 1993. </p>

<p>This book examines the issue of women in Islam from a largely historical standpoint. It
shows how the different way that women are treated in Muslim society arose from Islamic
law, the Koran, and tradition. The author wrote the book for a wide range of readers,
since the idea of women still living by the laws of traditional Islamic countries has
become the focus of increasing international interest. His section on purdah focuses on
the passages from the Koran that suggest the idea. He also remarks that purdah has had
unfavorable consequences for women in Islam and the development of society as a whole.
This text is useful in providing the historical background from which purdah arose. </p>

<hr>

<table width="100%">
  <tbody>
    <tr vAlign="bottom">
      <td valign="top" align="left"><p align="center"><a href="index.html#Disclaimer">DISCLAIMER</a></p><p align="center"><a HREF="http://www.kings.edu/womens_history"><img SRC="images/kback.gif" BORDER="0" ALT="BACK" width="60" height="55"></a></td>
      <td valign="top" align="center"><font face="Arial" size="2" color="#800000">This page has had<br>
        <!--webbot bot="HitCounter" u-custom i-digits="0" i-image="3"
        PREVIEW="&lt;strong&gt;[Hit Counter]&lt;/strong&gt;" i-resetvalue="0" startspan --><img src="_vti_bin/fpcount.exe/womens_history/?Page=purdah.html|Image=3" alt="Hit Counter"><!--webbot bot="HitCounter" i-checksum="6109" endspan -->
        <br>
        hits since 9 February 2007.</font></td>
        <td align="right"><font color="#800000">URL: http://departments.kings.edu/womens_history/purdah.html<br>
      Written by Susan P. Arnett, 1998<br>
      Last Revision: 18 December 2001<br>
      Copyright &#169; MMV Prof. <a href="http://staff.kings.edu/bapavlac">Pavlac</a>'s
          Women's History Site<br>
   </font
   <img border="0" src="images/CQSbapmail.gif" alt="Questions, Suggestions, Comments? e-mail bapavlacATkings.edu" width="397" height="55">
   </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</body>
</html>
 contentType 9 text/html url 60 https://departments.kings.edu:443/womens_history/purdah.html responseCode 3 200 