xmqmpeyibmoaredejmfqdqramaqcyclcbqycnqfc length 5 28177 page 28177 <HTML><HEAD><TITLE>Catherine the Great</TITLE>
<META http-equiv=Content-Type content="text/html; charset=windows-1252">
<META content="Annotated Bibliography of Catherine the Great, Empress of Russia" 
name=description>
<META 
content="history, women's history, Catherine II, Russia, Melissa Toscani, Tait, Wakefield, Pavlac" 
name=keywords>
</HEAD>
<BODY bgColor=#ffffff>
<DIV align=center>
<TABLE width="100%" border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD width="50%">
      <H1 align=center><B><FONT color=#990000><img border="0" src="images/slrevs.gif" width="57" height="51">Empress Catherine II "The Great" 
      of Russia</FONT></B></H1>
      <h2 align=center><b><font color="#800000">(b. 1729, r. 1762-d.1796)</font></b></h2></TD>
    <TD width="50%">
      <P align=right><map name="FPMap1">
        <area href="index.html" target="_blank" shape="rect" coords="140, 0, 283, 197">
        <area href="http://departments.kings.edu/history" target="_blank" coords="72, 2, 143, 100" shape="rect">
        <area href="http://www.kings.edu" shape="rect" coords="0, 0, 71, 102" target="_blank"></map><img border="0" src="images/khLw.gif" usemap="#FPMap1" width="288" height="198"></P></TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE></DIV>
<P>Perhaps one of the most important leaders of the Russian Empire, Catherine 
the Second, or "The Great,"&nbsp;helped set the foundations for the Russian 
“Westernization” in the 19th and 20th centuries.&nbsp; Known for her 
intelligence and ambitions to rule the Russian Empire, Catherine not only 
challenged the social norms of the time but also set the precedent for women in 
powerful positions.&nbsp; Catherine ruled through corruption, 
scandal,&nbsp;political reforms, and land expansion.&nbsp; She consolidated 
power from the serfs and feudal lords by continuing the political reforms 
started by Peter the Great.&nbsp; Land expansion dramatically increased during 
the Polish civil war in the late 1760's and again in 1768 when a Russian victory 
over the Ottoman Empire resulted in new territory stretching to the banks of the 
<ST1:PLACE w:st="on">Black Sea</ST1:PLACE> .&nbsp; In addition to this, 
Catherine imported many great works in literature, art, and print from the 
Western European nations.&nbsp; <ST1:CITY w:st="on"><ST1:PLACE w:st="on">St. 
Petersburg</ST1:PLACE> </ST1:CITY>blossomed sculptures, palaces, and educational 
systems.&nbsp; Education and law codes further developed under her reign.&nbsp; 
At the end of her thirty-four year reign from 1762 to 1796, Catherine had 
catapulted <ST1:COUNTRY-REGION w:st="on"><ST1:PLACE w:st="on">Russia</ST1:PLACE> 
</ST1:COUNTRY-REGION>into the world scene as a major world 
empire.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</P>
<P>Born on May 2, 1729, in the German city of&nbsp; Stettin (Szczecin, Poland 
today), into the family of Prince Christian August of Anhalt-Zerbst, Catherine 
was christened Sophie of Anhalt-Zerbst a daughter of a minor German prince in 
Prussian service. <SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;</SPAN>Immediately 
following her birth Sophie faced many challenges in a society which legally 
subjugating its woman population.<SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; 
</SPAN>Although she had society stacked against her, she was recognized by her 
father for her great ability to learn and remember concepts and ideas.<SPAN 
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </SPAN>Only after she had proven her abilities 
did she receive formal education.<SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; 
</SPAN>In 1744, she married Grand Duke Peter of <ST1:PLACE 
w:st="on">Holstein</ST1:PLACE> , heir to the Russian throne.<SPAN 
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </SPAN>Although Sophie was a German, she like 
her mother strove to be as Russian as her mother in-law Elizabeth the I.<SPAN 
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </SPAN>Sophie not only studied the Russian 
language but also took the name Catherine II in honor of her mother Catherine 
the II.<SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </SPAN>In addition to this 
Catherine converted the Russian Orthodox Church in order to be married into the 
imperial line.<SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</SPAN></P>
<P>Using her sexuality to obtain legitimacy for her position, Catherine was 
encouraged to produce an heir to the line.<SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; 
</SPAN>In 1754, during an affair with Sergey Saltykov, Catherine bore a child 
named Paul.<SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </SPAN>It is not altogether 
clear whether Paul is the legitimate son of her husband Peter, or the son of 
Saltykov.<SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;</SPAN>Emperior 
Peter III and Catherine II came to power in 1761 after Empress Elizabeth 
died.<SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </SPAN>The marriage to Peter was 
further put into jeopardy because Peter was ill equipped to handle ruling Russia 
Empire.<SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </SPAN>Lacking common sense and 
alienating the <ST1:STREET w:st="on"><ST1:ADDRESS w:st="on">Russian 
Court</ST1:ADDRESS> </ST1:STREET>, Peter further compounded his mistakes by 
withdrawing from war with <ST1:COUNTRY-REGION w:st="on"><ST1:PLACE 
w:st="on">Prussia</ST1:PLACE> </ST1:COUNTRY-REGION>in 1762.<SPAN 
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </SPAN>This event coupled with the seizure of 
Church lands and disinheriting his son Paul resulted in Catherine’s coup on June 
28, 1762.<SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </SPAN>Peter III was sent to 
prison where he died at the hands of his captures.<SPAN 
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</SPAN></P>
<P>In its own right the reign of Catherine the Great was impressive, but it was 
made all the more important because she was a women.<SPAN 
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; &nbsp;</SPAN>She continued Peter the Great's 
reforms of the Russian state, further increasing central control over the 
provinces. Her goal was to rationalize and reform the administration of the 
Russian Empire. One of the most prosperous periods for <ST1:COUNTRY-REGION 
w:st="on">Russia</ST1:COUNTRY-REGION> , Catherine undertook a wide range of 
internal political reforms, and waged two successful wars against the Ottoman 
Empire and extend the borders of <ST1:COUNTRY-REGION w:st="on"><ST1:PLACE 
w:st="on">Russia</ST1:PLACE> </ST1:COUNTRY-REGION>.<SPAN 
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; &nbsp;</SPAN>Her achievements played a key role 
in the development of <ST1:PLACE w:st="on"><ST1:COUNTRY-REGION 
w:st="on">Russia</ST1:COUNTRY-REGION> </ST1:PLACE>as a modern state not only in 
a political sense but also in a cultural sense.<SPAN 
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </SPAN>Under her rule many she directed the 
building of the <ST1:PLACE w:st="on"><ST1:PLACENAME 
w:st="on">Hermitage</ST1:PLACENAME> <ST1:PLACETYPE 
w:st="on">Museum</ST1:PLACETYPE> </ST1:PLACE>.<SPAN 
style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </SPAN>Commissioning building all over 
<ST1:COUNTRY-REGION w:st="on">Russia</ST1:COUNTRY-REGION> , Catherine founded academies, journals, 
libraries, and corresponded with French Encyclopedists, including Voltaire, 
Diderot, and d'Alembert. Also, Catherine is notorious for her love affairs, 
which included Gregory Orlov and Gregor Potemkin. Upon her death in 1796 she was 
succeeded by her son Paul I.<SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; </SPAN>Her 
achievements would live on a help propel <ST1:COUNTRY-REGION 
w:st="on"><ST1:PLACE w:st="on">Russia</ST1:PLACE> </ST1:COUNTRY-REGION>to become 
a major world power after her death.<SPAN style="mso-spacerun: yes">&nbsp; 
&nbsp;</SPAN></P>
<HR>

<H2 align=center><B>Annotated Bibliography</B></H2>
<P style="LINE-HEIGHT: 100%"><B>Alexander, John T. <I>Catherine the Great: Life 
and Lege</I>nd. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989.<BR></B>Alexander 
examines the life of Catherine the Great in general, but pays particular 
attention to issues which other books on Catherine usually omit. He first 
focuses on her involvement in the coup d'etat: a conspiracy against her husband 
Peter III. Alexander discusses Catherine's concern with the crisis in public 
health in Russia, including her attempts to fight smallpox, pestilence, and the 
plague. Catherine had many lovers throughout her life and Alexander includes the 
love notes written to Peter Zavadovski from the years 1776 to 1777. Alexander 
attacks the stories of Catherine's involvement with bestiality.&nbsp; He assures 
readers that Catherine did not die while attempting to have sexual intercourse 
with a horse, but rather after suffered from an attack of apoplexy while sitting 
on her commode. Alexander not only discusses Catherine's life while she was 
Empress of Russia, but he also discusses her impact in the later centuries on 
stage and screen, sculpture, and painting.</P>
<P><B>Ashby, Ruth and Ohrn, Deborah Gore, ed.&nbsp; <I>Herstory, Women Who 
Change the World.</I>&nbsp; New York:&nbsp; Viking, 1995.<BR></B>This is a great 
resource for understanding the basic information on Catherine the Great.&nbsp; 
This short, but to the point summary of her life is very good at providing a 
starting point for research on this person.&nbsp; Only basic information is 
given, but it does do a good job of providing information to anyone on any 
reading level.&nbsp; No prior knowledge or advanced education in necessary to 
understand this work.&nbsp; This is a good resource to start off with to guide a 
person on for a more in-depth research.&nbsp;&nbsp;</P>
<P><B>Cowles, Virginia. <I>The Romanovs</I>. New York, N.Y.: Harper and Row, 
1971.<BR></B>This book concentrates on the lives of those related to the Romanov 
dynasty. Chapter IV is dedicated to Catherine The Great. Cowles focuses on 
Catherine's promiscuity. She goes as far as to call Catherine a nymphomaniac. 
When Catherine's husband took the throne of Russia, Catherine was pregnant with 
Grigory Orlov's child. After Orlov's involvement in overthrowing her husband 
from the throne of Russia, Catherine refused to marry him. In the latter portion 
of the book she discusses Catherine's relationship with Grigory Potemkin. He was 
referred to as the "cyclops of the court." He had lost an eye, and one of the 
stories blames the loss of this eye on Catherine's former lover, Grigory Orlov. 
Potemkin apparently was involved in a fight with the Orlov brothers. Although it 
is believed Catherine never remarried after Peter III, many letters written to 
Potemkin address him as 'dear husband,' 'beloved husband' and she alludes to 
herself as 'your wife.' Cowles also examines her love of art and literature, 
including her correspondences with Voltaire and Diderot. Through her love of 
writing, Catherine poured her heart out in letters and memoirs. Despite her 
hatred of France, Catherine embraced the French language and culture. French was 
the language of her court. Catherine thought of herself as a liberal. The book 
features many color photographs that were specially commissioned by Russian born 
photographer, Victor Kennet.</P>
<P><B>Dixon, Ursula. "Catherine the Great." <EM>Ursula's History Web.</EM>&nbsp; 
&lt;<A href="http://members.tripod.com/~Nevermore/CGREAT.HTM" 
target=_blank>http://members.tripod.com/~Nevermore/CGREAT.HTM</A>&gt; (9 Nov
2005).</B><BR>This web site by Dixon, a historian, discusses Catherine the Great 
and provides personal opinions of her. It contains an analysis of her ruling 
style, along with information about her marriage, the birth of her son, the 
reign of Peter III, and her reign as Empress. It includes pictures of her and 
those who were closely related to her and provides a bibliography. Dixon 
believes that Russia owes her much for her reign and that she truly earned the 
title "the Great." Dixon also believes that too many judge her for having 
promiscuous relationships while she may have just been filling her lonely hours 
by sharing her intellect with these men. She believes that in order to judge her 
greatness and see her achievements, one must distinguish between Catherine the 
woman and Catherine the Empress.</P>
<P><B>Gooch, G.P. <I>Catherine The Great and Other Studie</I><U>s</U>. Hamden, 
CT: Archon Books, 1966.<BR></B>Gooch refers to Catherine as one of the three 
celebrated 'Philosophic Despots' of the eighteenth century. Gooch questions 
whether or not Catherine's son Paul was the legitimate heir of Peter III, or the 
son of one of Catherine's lovers. He further examines the poor relationship 
between Catherine and her son. Despite other author's accusations of Catherine's 
hatred of France, Gooch devotes a whole chapter to Catherine's sympathy towards 
Marie Antoinette and her troubles resulting from the French Revolution. She is 
quoted as admiring her. The book begins to lose its focus on Catherine after 
discussing her relationship with Voltaire. The book goes on to discuss French 
salons and Otto von Bismark of Germany. There is a substantial section dedicated 
to Voltaire and his work as a historian. There is an index to further help the 
reader but there is no bibliography nor are there any footnotes.</P>
<P><B>Haslip, Joan.&nbsp; <I>Catherine The Great.</I>&nbsp; New York:&nbsp; G.P. 
Putnam's Sons, 1976.<BR></B>The author of this work provides a very good 
detailed analysis of the life of Catherine the Great Great emphasis is placed on 
her thirty-four year reign.&nbsp; This in-depth analysis of one of the greatest 
rulers of the Russian Empire attempts to understand the character of Catherine 
the Great.&nbsp; Much of the resources in this book came from the Polish 
historian Monsieur Walezewski, who wrote a biography about her.&nbsp; The 
information in the work is good but a bit dated.&nbsp; In addition to this, this 
work requires an advanced knowledge about Catherine and the political and 
economic climate of the time period.&nbsp; In all this is a well written piece 
of work.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</P>
<P><B>Kaus, Gina. <I>Catherine: The Portrait of an Empress</I>. New York: The 
Viking Press, 1935.<BR></B>Kaus pays a great deal of attention to Catherine's 
early life. Her relationship with her siblings and the poor relationship she had 
with her father discussed in detail. Catherine hungered for love, something she 
would struggle with for her whole life. She desired a husband who would provide 
her with a crown more dazzling than that of Zerbst, in her native land of 
Germany. Her marriage to Peter III was a failure but provided her with the crown 
of Russia. Her extramarital affairs are discussed. After the conspiracy against 
her husband was successfully carried out, the Imperial Guards proclaimed her the 
sole ruler of Russia. There was an intense hatred between Catherine and her son 
Paul, and because of this, Catherine planned to make her grandson, Alexander, 
the successor to the throne of Russia. Grigory Potemkin loved and admired her as 
no one else in Catherine's life. A number of illustrations are included as well 
as an index.</P>
<P><B>Kornilov, Alexander.&nbsp; <I>Modern Russian History.&nbsp; </I>New 
York:&nbsp; Russell &amp; Russell, 1970.<BR></B>This work is an historical 
analysis of the progression from the medieval Russian Empire to the fall of the 
Empire to the communists.&nbsp; This compressive work devoted about to the 
achievements and importance of Catherine's thirty-four year reign.&nbsp; This 
work although very good, it does require advanced knowledge of Russian history 
and the political climate of the time.&nbsp; This work stresses Catherine's 
importance in land reforms, political reforms, education reforms, financial 
reforms, and cultural reforms.&nbsp; It credits Catherine for forging a strong 
national state, extending the borders, the start of capitalism, and land 
reforms.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;</P>
<P><B>Lentin, Tony. "The Return of Catherine The Great." <I>History Today</I>, 
December 1996, 16-20.<BR></B>This article celebrates the bicentenary year of her 
death. There is suddenly a new wave of scholarly interest after an international 
conference in St. Petersburg. The article focuses on her accomplishments during 
her reign. She provided Russia with three and a half decades of political 
stability. She dedicated herself to the Enlightenment and putting those ideas 
into practice through legislation. She believed passionately in the power of the 
printed word. She encouraged book production and the translation of foreign 
works into Russian. The article highlights some of Catherine's most important 
reforms brought about during her reign. It also refers to some of the newest 
sources available on Catherine The Great and Lentin includes them in his 
citations.</P>
<P><B>Madariaga, Isabel De.&nbsp; <I>Catherine the Great.</I>&nbsp; New Haven, 
London:&nbsp; Yale University Press, 1990.<BR></B>Madariaga's work is a great 
resource for understanding the life and importance Catherine the Great was to 
the Russian Empire.&nbsp; This work not only identifies her achievement but it 
also describes in detail her she came to power in Russia.&nbsp; A great emphasis 
is places on two areas in the work, first her achievements as a ruler and second 
her achievements as a women ruler.&nbsp; Focusing on Catherine's education, 
social, and economic policies, this work fully illustrates her accomplishments 
as a leader of an empire.&nbsp; In addition to this, the author details how 
important she was because she was a women.&nbsp; This greatly enhances the work 
of Madariaga and further makes this a good resource.&nbsp;&nbsp;</P>
<P><B>Masson, Charles. <I>Secret Memoirs of the Court of Petersbur</I><U>g</U>. 
2<SUP>nd </SUP>ed. New York, N.Y.: Arno Press, 1970.<BR></B>Masson examines 
Catherine's " favorites " or lovers whom she held in high esteem during her 
life. There are also documents, which question whether Russia would suffer the 
same fate as France and succumb to revolution. Chapter six examines the 
conditions in Russia that might have led up to a revolution. Masson comments on 
the debauchery occurring in Russia that went seemingly unpunished. Masson 
discusses female run governments in general and especially the female leaders of 
Russia before Catherine II. Catherine The Great tried to better the lives of 
Russian women. She gave them some positions of power and founded the Smol'ny 
Institute, Russia's first girls' school, in 1769. Catherine's love for knowledge 
and education were to be passed along to her grandsons but not in such elaborate 
fashion as she had planned. Their education was based on the great thinkers such 
as Locke, and Rousseau. Catherine imported many French scholars to educate the 
Russians, and he contributes this as a factor to why so many Russians, including 
Catherine, were taken by French culture. This book focuses in general on the 
influences in Catherine's life.</P>
<P><B>O'Malley, Lurana Donnels. "Masks of the Empress." <I>Comparative 
Drama</I>, Spring 1997, 65-85.<BR></B>O'Malley reviews Catherine The Great's 
first play, <U>Oh These Times</U>. She discusses Catherine's use of plays as a 
way of expressing her political messages and priorities. Her attitude toward 
superstition and her attitude towards Moscow are major themes of the play. 
Moscow signified everything that needed change in her Enlightened Russia. The 
play also is a reflection of her moral and religious beliefs. This article 
enlightens the reader to yet, another of Catherine's talents. This article is an 
example of one of the enjoyments of Catherine's life and how she used it to 
further influence the lives of her subjects.</P>
<P><B>Pallasart Web Design.&nbsp; "Empress Catherine II "the Great" &lt;<A 
href="http://www.alexanderpalace.org/palace/catherine.html">http://www.alexanderpalace.org/palace/catherine.html</A>&gt; 
(24 October 2005).<BR></B>This is a very useful website which gives an accurate 
account of Catherine's life.&nbsp; This basic biography does little in the 
analysis of her rule but basic biographical information is useful.&nbsp; This is 
a good resource for starting the research on Catherine's life and her 
accomplishment&nbsp; The site is well kept and informative but it is not known 
how often it is updated.&nbsp; Also contained on this site is a list of other 
Russian rulers.&nbsp;&nbsp;</P>
<P><B>Raeff, Marc. "Autocracy Tempered by Reform or Regicide." <I>The American 
Historical Review</I>, October 1993, 1143-55.<BR></B>The article examines the 
neglect of Catherine the Great's reign in Russia. He discusses new biographies 
written about the successive rule of Catherine II, Peter III, and Paul I. Raeff 
blames Communism for the neglect of this period of Russian History. With 
Communism's collapse in Russia there is now a renewed interest in people such as 
Catherine the Great.</P>
<P><B>Reddaway, W.F. <I>Documents of Catherine The Great</I>. New York: 
1971.</B><BR>This book was written in French, and later translated into English. 
The book is a reproduction of the correspondences between Catherine and Voltaire 
between the years 1762 and 1777. The letters reveal Catherine's philosophies in 
law, punishment, trade and commerce, and education. The book discusses Peter the 
Great's inspiration in regard to Catherine's projected code. Reddaway offers his 
commentary and analysis after each chapter. A timeline relevant to the 
correspondence of Catherine and Voltaire is included at the end of the book. It 
includes what was happening in philosophy, in Britain, within the European 
continent, and in Russia.</P>
<P><B>StanKlos.com. "Catherine the Great, Ekaterina Alexeevna, 1729-1796, 
Empress Of All Russia." Virtualology. 2000. &lt;<A 
href="http://www.virtualology.com/virtualmuseumofhistory/internationalhall/worldleaders/CATHERINETHEGREAT.ORG/" 
target=_blank>http://www.virtualology.com/virtualmuseumofhistory/internationalhall/worldleaders/CATHERINETHEGREAT.ORG/</A>&gt; 
(9 November 2005).</B><BR>A picture of her autograph and briefly annotated links 
to several other sites.&nbsp;&nbsp;</P>
<P><B>"The Empress of Opera." </B><I><B>Civilization</B></I><B>, 1 February 
1997, 15.<BR></B>Although the article is short in length, it discusses some 
important elements of Catherine's life. For example, her correspondence with 
French philosophers and the many lovers she had throughout her life are 
examined. Supposedly tone-deaf, Catherine devoted some of her time to opera. She 
wrote librettos for operas that were composed by musicians who she imported to 
St. Petersburg. Her most extravagant work was the dramatic <U>History of 
Oleg</U>. Oleg was a ninth-century Russian prince. Her work expressed her 
political views. The article makes it a point to mention that since she was 
Empress, she could easily get her librettos published. Despite this fact, 
contemporary audiences applauded her work.</P>
<P><B>Thomson, Gladys Scott. <I>Catherine the Great and the Expansion of 
Russia</I>. Aylesbury, London: English Universities Press, LTD., 
1950.<BR></B>Thomson presents a thorough view of Catherine the Great from her 
childhood until her death. Thomson discusses Catherine's young life in Germany 
and her incompatibility with Peter III. Thomson attributes reading as the basis 
for her involvement in politics. A major portion of the book is spent on her 
foreign policy and her dealings with Lithuania, Poland, and the defeat of 
Turkey. The relationship between Grigory Potemkin is discussed in great detail. 
The book also examines the continuation of Peter The Great's improvements and 
modernization of Russia. Because of this concept of modernization, Catherine 
built statues and public gardens and promoted music, theater, and dancing. She 
built an academy to supervise all the branches of art throughout Russia. She 
also founded a royal school of theater. Catherine was especially concerned with 
smallpox and plague, so she stimulated improvements in the science of medicine. 
The relationship between Catherine and her grandsons is another section of 
importance in this book. There is an annotated bibliography included at the end 
of the book for further reading on Catherine The Great.</P>
<P><B>U.S. Library of Congress. "Early Imperial Russia."Country Studies US. 
n.d.&nbsp; &lt;<A href="http://countrystudies.us/russia/4.htm" 
target=_blank>http://countrystudies.us/russia/4.htm</A>&gt; (9 November 2005).<BR></B>This site focuses on the Imperial Expansion of Russia during the 
reigns of Peter the Great and Catherine the Great. It describes the annexation 
of many areas as the result of various treaties, as well as the the results from 
partitioning Poland. It also discusses the Pugachev Uprising which led to 
Catherine's determination to reorganize Russia's administration. Overall it 
shows how Catherine set the foundation for the nineteenth century empire. It 
provides useful information about Catherine's role in Russia and her attempt to 
make its administration more effective.</P>
<P><B>Van de Pas, Leo. "Catherine II "the Great." <EM>Worldroots.</EM> <A 
href="http://worldroots.com/brigitte/gifs/cath2russia.jpg" 
target=_blank>http://worldroots.com/brigitte/gifs/cath2russia.jpg</A>. (9 
November 2005).</B><BR>On a site about the ancestors and relations to the 
author, he includes a portrait of the elderly monarch.&nbsp;</P>
<P><B>Waliszewski, K. <I>The Romance of an Empress</I>. New York: D. Appleton 
and Company, 1905.<BR></B>Although this book was dedicated to Catherine's entire 
life, chapter eleven provided valuable insight to Catherine as a writer. It was 
in her works written for the stage that the pen of Catherine is most 
prolific(p356). She does a bit of everything in literature, but she concentrated 
especially on dramatic writing. She wrote plays that were satirical, 
philosophical, social, or religious. Waliszewski provides the reader with a 
detailed account of Catherine's life. Its only flaw is that there is no 
bibliography, index, or endnotes of any kind.</P>
<HR SIZE=4>
<FONT size=-1>
<TABLE width="100%">
  <TBODY>
  <TR vAlign=bottom>
    <TD vAlign=top align=left>
      <P align=left><font SIZE="-1"><a href="index.html#Disclaimer"><b>DISCLAIMER</b><br>
      </a><map name="FPMap0">
      <area href="http://departments.kings.edu/womens_history/index.html" shape="rect" coords="144, 0, 215, 98">
      <area href="http://departments.kings.edu/history" coords="72, 2, 143, 98" shape="rect">
      <area href="http://www.kings.edu" shape="rect" coords="0, 0, 71, 98" target="_blank"></map><img border="0" src="http://departments.kings.edu/womens_history/images/khw.gif" usemap="#FPMap0" width="216" height="99">&nbsp;</font><A 
      href="index.html#Disclaimer"><BR></A>&nbsp;</P></TD>
    <TD vAlign=top align=middle><FONT color=#990000 size=2>This page has had 
	<!--webbot bot="HitCounter" u-custom i-digits="0"
      i-image="3" PREVIEW="&lt;strong&gt;[Hit Counter]&lt;/strong&gt;" i-resetvalue="0" --> hits since </FONT></FONT><font color="#990000" size="2">15
    December</font><FONT size=-1><FONT color=#990000 size=2> 2005.</FONT></font></TD>
    <TD align=right><FONT color=#800000><FONT size=3>URL: 
      http://departments.kings.edu/womens_history/catherine.html<BR>Original Written by 
      Melissa Toscani, 1998<BR><FONT color=#800000>Revised by </FONT>Tricia 
      Tait<FONT color=#800000>, November 2000<BR>Revised by&nbsp;Andrew 
      Wakefield December 2005<br>
      </FONT>Last Revision: 2010 May 20<BR><FONT color=#800000>Copyright © MMIIII Prof. Pavlac's Women's 
      History Site<BR></FONT>
       
      </FONT></FONT>
      <img border="0" src="images/CQSbapmail.gif" alt="Questions, Suggestions, Comments? e-mail bapavlacATkings.edu" width="397" height="55">
      </TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE></BODY></HTML>
 contentType 9 text/html url 64 https://departments.kings.edu:443/womens_history/catherine2.html responseCode 3 200 