caeqbmcqeonsiiiqgqlazqkqvcxaymbsekzismva length 5 15865 page 15865 <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.0 Transitional//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>The Williams Regime in the Bechuanaland Protectorate</title>
<meta name="keywords" content="Ralph Williams, Resident Commissioner, Bechuanaland Protectorate">
<meta name="description" content="Ralph Williams as Resident Commissioner of the Bechuanaland Protectorate">
<style type="text/css">
<!--
blockquote.x1 {
   background-color: #F0F8FF;
   padding: 13px;
   }
-->
</style>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#FFFFF0" text="#000000">
<center><strong><a name="doc_top">University of Botswana History
Department</a></strong></center>

<center>
<h1>Colonial Administration Page 3:</h1>

<h1>The Williams Regime in the Bechuanaland Protectorate 1901-1906</h1>

<p>by Neil Parsons</p>
</center>

<center><small><a href="../../index.html">History Home Page</a>
&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="../../h-index.htm">Site Index</a> &nbsp;|&nbsp;
<a href="../../ub/np.htm">Neil Parsons</a>
<br>
<a href="colad0.htm">Introduction</a> &nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href= 
"colad1.htm">Page 1. Extracts from Documents (A-J)</a>
&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="colad2.htm">Page 2. 'Charles Rey and
previous commissioners of the Bechuanaland Protectorate'</a>
&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="colad4.htm">Page 4: Intelligence Reporting
In Colonial Botswana, 1895-1965</a></small></center>

<hr size="3" color="#0000FF">
<blockquote class="x1">There is nothing more memorable in Bechuana history
than the action and character of this great white chief. He had a
body suited to the character of mind, and which became command, he
could roar like a lion when law is transgressed, and thunders there
and there when duty is not performed to his satisfaction. The
Bechuana nicknamed him "LORATE". 

<p>I heard him saying to Khama, "Had I been resident Commissioner
during your son's revolt, your son could not have deserted you, for
I should have deported all the ring leaders".</p>

<p>Sir Ralph knew native much, and therefore generally trusted them
but little, [but] when he knew any man to be good like Khama, he
reposed in him an entire confidence. His skill as Resident
Commissioner was directed by practised wisdom and common sense
acquired from the many years he had spent in different parts of
south Africa. He rarely made mistakes and he provided for every
possible contingency from the strength of his courage and his will
which always aimed high. To rule the native was his pride, that he
earned for himself the great name "Kgosi Lorate".</p>

<p>He had behind him a strong personality, Mr. Barry May, as
Government Secretary.</p>

<p>His shrewdness and inflexible determination was beyond compare
when dealing in native cases, and yet he could not speak the
language.</p>

<p>A ruler as capable as he, has never been in the Bechuanaland.
Yes, he had vices in his Administrations, and great ones but they
were vices of a great mind. Ambition which aimed high, the malady
of every extensive genius of a great man.`</p>

<p>The first glance at him when you enter his presence for the
first time produces an arresting impression upon you. Even if you
are not aware of his identity, you feel at once as you look into
his stern but ugly face that you are in the mouth of a hungry lion
or in the presence of greatness of an extraordinary superiority.
The law-breakers, white or black or even the chiefs who are today
looked upon as paragon of perfection, he looked upon with contempt,
and treated with cruelty when they receive their doom.</p>

<p>He could scream like a wounded elephant, tables turned
up-side-down, papers thrown here and there as if by magic or a
cyclone, the walls of his office shake as if by earth tremor at the
thundering order of this great chief.</p>

<p>He would never permit himself to be oil-influenced by his
subordinate officials, to this point he was very sarcastic.</p>

<p>He cared not even for his own staff, when wrong is committed,
was imperious and arbitrary and was severe to all who opposed his
plans but above all he took a deep interest in the police that was
one of his standing pride.</p>
</blockquote>

<hr width="50%">
<p>This entry from Simon Ratshosa's 'My Book on Bechuanaland
Protectorate' (c.1931) sums up the Bangwato view not just of Ralph
Williams' character, but of the way in which he put the
Bechuanaland Protectorate on a regular administrative basis-and how
he established a mutual confidence with Khama, which subsequent
administrators were not to match up to.</p>

<p>Ralph Champneys Williams (1848-1927), a Welsh relative of the
Bethell and Warren families, came to the B.P. from the Colonial
Secretaryship of Barbados (1897-1901) and Treasurership of
Gibraltar (1890-7). So though he had had the conventional
pro-Rhodes, South African and military experience (1882-90) of B.P.
administrators, Ralph Williams imported for the first time Colonial
Office bureaucratic norms into B.P. government.</p>

<p>His first problem as Resident Commissioner of the B.P. was to
create a uniform system of administration. The protectorate was
faced with the anomaly that most of its junior administrative
officers were not wholly subject to the authority of the Resident
Commissioner-because they were officers of the police, which since
1895/6 had been part of the British South Africa Police. Indeed the
reason why the administrative capital of the B.P. had been placed
at Mafeking, a ridiculous but understandable experience according
to Williams, was that it was the temporary local police
headquarters in expectation of the imminent transfer of B.P.
administration to the supervision of Salisbury in Southern
Rhodesia. On appointment in 1901, Williams tackled the B.S.A.P.
commandant at Mafeking, Col. Walford, who made it clear that the
R.C. had no real control over him.</p>

<blockquote class="x1">I then made it clear to him that the old dual control was at an
end, and that I intended to assume the control of
everything...after a time I asked Lord Milner [the High
Commissioner] to allow me practically to disband them and to
reconstitute them.</blockquote>

<p>In 1902 and 1903 the Bechuanaland Protectorate Police (B.P.P.)
was formed from the amalgamation of the Bechuana;and section of the
B.S.A.P. with the ('Basuto') Native Police, reducing the number of
white N.C.O.'s. 'I was never prouder of anything in my life than my
Basuto police' - Williams later recalled.</p>

<p>The second area in which Williams established the supremacy of
his civilian administration was judicial. Elements of the British
Army in the B.P. were attempting to be a law unto
themselves-despite the fact that the B.P. was the only British
territory south of the Zambezi not put under martial law during the
South African War. The Assistant Commissioners at Gaborone's and
Palapye were confirmed in their criminal jurisdiction and civil
judicial power, while the R.C. himself constituted the court of
appeal and sole arbiter of murder cases. Williams also obtained a
railway carriage for frequent travel into the B.P., and utilised
the telegraphic service to the full.</p>

<p>The third element of Williams' 'system of control' was
reinforcement (at least outside Ngamiland) of the principle that
'the paramount chief retained the dignity of his power and the
respect of his people while knowing well that his position depended
on the [Resident] Commissioner.' This he ensured through frequent,
almost ritual, visits to the Chiefs. In the Southern Protectorate
(and in 1906, Ngamiland) Williams particularly depended on Vivien
Ellenberger - 'probably the best Sechuana linguist now living' -
who assured the South African Native Affairs Commission
(S.A.N.A.C.) in 1904 that there was no formal code of B.P.
administration, only a policy of supervision of the Chiefs' powers
of judicial administration and tax-collection, plus control of
aliens, peace-keeping, and acts of violence to persons or
property.</p>

<p>In the Northern Protectorate outside the Tati concession, R.C.
Williams relied heavily on Chief Khama. Khama, of course, was on
terms of personal cordiality with the Colonial Secretary [Joseph
Chamberlain] himself. Every High Commissioner made it his duty to
establish such personal contacts and to become the subject of
Khama's 'old-fashioned grace that would have done honour to the
[English] beau of a hundred and fifty years ago.' The 'advice' of
Khama's Assistant Commissioner, Panzera, had to be couched in
almost obsequious terms-to persuade him only to make official
communications with foreign whites through the B.P. administration,
for example.</p>

<p>Ralph Williams' first substantial contact with Khama was in
October 1901, when the R.C. inspected the proposed new Bangwato
capital site at Serowe, prior to official approval for the move.
The ever exuberant Williams apparently exploded in fury when Khama
led the party miles off the beaten track on a prolonged waterless
hike. Williams thought Khama had lost his way: Khama explained it
was a diversion to avoid a washed-out drift. Anyway, the two
headstrong men made up their quarrel and became firm friends.
Colonial Office approval for the removal to Serowe came in January
1902. On February 26th, Khama and his chiefs pegged out the wards
of the new town-away from the government 'camp' (i.e. boma) that
Panzera had chosen on the previous day. The church and mission
sites were chosen on February 27th, and trading stands were
allotted on March 20th. Once the removal was completed, Khama sent
a regiment to burn down the old capital at the end of August:</p>

<blockquote class="x1">It was a novel and wonderful sight. The regiment
divided into parties and went into different sections of the town,
the men running from one hut to another with torches, and setting
them on fire, so that presently the huts were all ablaze together.
The whole place was enveloped in flame and smoke, and it was so hot
one could hardly breathe. For two or three days afterwards a haze
hung over the ruins...Nothing could exceed the weird dreariness of
Phalapye after that fire.</blockquote>

<p>But the Magistracy and the Assistant Commissioner remained at
Old Palapye, for the time being. The Colonial Office did not want
to take on the expenditure of following Khama to Serowe, so in
1902-3 Ralph Williams persuaded the Office to sanction instead the
A.C.'s removal to Francistown in the Tati Concession, instead.
Serowe was allocated a police officer with the lowly rank of
Assistant Magistrate.</p>

<p>Williams proved also to be a champion of the interests of the
'Bechuana' before that bugbear of all colonial administrations -the
British Treasury. He was particularly concerned that people who had
shown singular loyalty to the British during the War, supplying
invaluable men and money and intelligence services, should not have
their taxes doubled to the Basutoland rate of &pound;1.</p>

<blockquote class="x1">The imposition of such a tax would give colour to a rumour which
I have sometimes heard of as current amongst the natives that now
we have beaten the Boers we should give away native property
also.</blockquote>

<p>It was the Williams policy to support a Chief against all
comers: 'if we support our weak kings we will not allow Earls of
Warwick [king-makers] to trouble us'. He absolutely rejected the
old policy of rewarding conspirators against Chiefs with 'quasi
independence', and threatened their banishment (to the Colonial
Office's chagrin) out of the Protectorate. To this he added the
proviso that Chiefs would be foolish to disturb their 'golden ease'
by encouraging 'Ethiopianism', and 'that the day is gone when a
native chief may dictate to Government.' The test of his policy was
to come at the end of his reign in 1906, over the Sekgoma
Letsholathebe case ('by far my best and most important work in the
country') in Ngamiland.</p>

<p>The celebrated deposition of Sekgoma Letsholathebe from the
Tawana Chieftainship by R.C. Williams in 1906 can be seen as the
culmination of a long-term plan by Khama. There had been growing
antagonism between the two Chiefs from 1895 up to 1901. Khama came
to support Mathiba, the candidate of the Tawana king-maker Dithapo
Meno, against Sekgoma Letsholathebe. The B.P. administration was
alarmed by the situation in 1905, because Ngamiland lay in the
interstice between African resistances to colonialism in German
South West Africa and Portuguese Angola, and by the fact that the
pro-Mathiba party had begun to openly oppose Sekgoma
Letsholathebe's continuation as Chief. At first Ralph Williams
dismissed the pro-Mathiba case as missionary propaganda, and would
have been content to let the matter lie - had not Sekgoma
Letsholathebe himself arrived in Serowe in April 1906 when the High
Commissioner, Lord Selborne, was visiting. Williams' attitude until
this point had been that 'Premature intervention simply creates a
party against the whites, which it is above all things necessary to
avoid in the interests of economy and a peaceful South Africa.'
Or,</p>

<blockquote><em>They who in quarrels interpose
<br>
 Do often get a bloody nose.</em> (Hudibras)</blockquote>

<p>Selborne, however, preoccupied with the Bambata rebellion in
Natal and the potential spread of anti-colonial risings, fell in
with Khama's point of view. He even gave Khama the right to detain
Sekgoma Letsholathebe at Serowe. Sekgoma Letsholathebe then removed
under detention to Mafeking, and Melbourne ordered Williams to go
to the Tawana capital, Tsau. Here the Resident Commissioner, after
a long enquiry into marital and dynastic claims, ruled in favour of
Mathiba's succession, much to Khama's satisfaction. Khama had
evidently made a strong impression on Ralph Williams as the
official party left Serowe in May 1906 to trek to Ngamiland:</p>

<blockquote class="x1">I shall never forget Khama's greeting to me when he
came to bid me good-bye. After assuring me that I might be
confident that he would aid me in every possible way, even with
force should I call upon him to do so, the old man put his hand on
my shoulder, an unusual thing for a native to do [to a white
official], and, speaking in Sechuana, said, "You are going far and
on a dangerous mission, may the great God guard you and bring you
safely back".</blockquote>

<p>Khama and R.C. Williams never saw each other again. Williams
went off to become Governor of the Windward Islands at the end of
the Ngamiland enquiry. But he left a stamp on Bechuanaland
Protectorate administration. The Williams regime institutionalised
the centrality of a government secretariat at Mafeking by promoting
the R.C.'s accountant to the new post of Government Secretary in
1904. The post being held by the efficient Barry May from 1904 to
1915. But Williams' momentum was lost by the succession of Panzera
as R.C., generally characterised as a bone-headed military man . If
only Williams had stayed on, a subsequent R.C. told the European
Advisory Council in 1921, the capital-that ultimate symbol of B.P.
lack of autonomy and subordination to South Africa-would have been
transferred to within the Protectorate.</p>

<p>[extracted from Q.N. Parsons, "Khama III, the Bamangwato and the
British, 1895-1923' University of Edinburgh: PhD, 1973, chap.8 'The
Williams R&eacute;gime and the Union Question'.]</p>

<hr>
<a href="#doc_top">Back to top</a> 

<p><small>Copyright &copy; 1999 Neil Parsons
<br>
Although copying is permitted, this is <b>not</b> public-domain text,
and there are certain conditions.<br>
See <a href="../../copy.htm">copyright permissions page</a>
<br>
Last updated 24 April 2010</small></p>
</body>
</html>

 contentType 9 text/html url 47 http://www.thuto.org:80/ubh/bw/colad/colad3.htm responseCode 3 200 