emtkkihixayqaovqmmlaesxgzipgvqtmugrqvstq length 4 1922 page 1922 <html><head><title>About range maps</title><base TARGET="_top">
</head>
<body bgcolor="#66cc99">

<P><A HREF="intro.html"><IMG BORDER=0 SRC="icons/home.gif" ALT="[HOME]"></A></P>

<h1>About range maps</h1>

<p> The range maps associated with the species entries are automaticly
generated from the textual region information. When interpreting the
maps, one should keep the following points in mind:

<ul>

<li><strong>Always</strong> check the textual range information before
making any decisions based on the map.

<li><strong>Note:</strong> when the species includes subspecies or
forms with their own range information, the map is generated only once
for the full combination of those ranges, <strong>BUT</strong> the
text under the map only is only that of the main entry.

<li>the region does not always contain the full global range the
species, for example it may only contain distribution within Europe or
West Palearctic region. The covered area should be indicated at right
end of the top navigation area.

<li>the detail of the region information varies greatly depending on
when I entered the data and what sources I
had. <strong>Especially</strong> be extra cautious when the textual
information lists all upper case symbols, such as EU, NA, AF, SA,
etc. In such cases it often only indicates that the species does occur
somehwere within such area.

<li>the map is built by combining pieces of areas based on the
location names. This often results somewhat strange looking, bumpy or
convoluted maps.

</ul>
 </p>

<p>If anyone is actually interested about the rules of translating the
textual descriptions into maps, the description file is <a
href="mapping.lst">mapping.lst</a>. The actual code interpreting this
is written in perl and is part of the <A HREF="index.pl">index.pl</A> script.</p>

<p>
</p>

<ADDRESS>1999
<A HREF="http://www.vtt.fi/tte/staff/msa/">Markku Savela</A>
</ADDRESS>
</body></html>
 contentType 9 text/html url 57 http://ftp.funet.fi:80/index/Tree_of_life/about-maps.html responseCode 3 200 