kapksizepesedomcxeggjaiccsyceijgrmqqheki length 4 8889 page 8889 <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
  
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">

<head>

<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=ISO-8859-1" />

<title> Neuroscience For Kids - Bell's Palsy </title>

<link rel="start" title="return to home page" 
href="http://faculty.washington.edu/chudler/neurok.html" />

<meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />

<meta name="keywords" content="neuroscience,brain,nervous 
system,spinal_cord,k-12,school,drugs,LSD,alcohol,medicine,life 
science,glia,sleep,pain,children,development,neurology,kids,worksheets,language,laughter,music,neurobiology,cognition,perception,sensation,hands-on,activities,experiments,biology,elementary,creative_writing,projects,demonstrations,nerve,cocaine,awareness_week,science_fair,nicotine,learning,memory, 
education,student,secondary,bells palsy,chronic traumatic encephalopathy" />

<meta name="description" content="Intended for elementary and secondary 
school students and teachers who are interested in learning about the 
nervous system and brain with hands on activities, experiments and 
information." />
  
<style type="text/css" media="screen, projection"> @import "c/deB.css"; 
</style>

<!--[if IE 6]> <style type="text/css" media="screen"> @import 
"c/ie6.css"; </style> <![endif]-->

<!--[if IE 5]> <style type="text/css" media="screen"> @import 
"c/ie5.css"; </style> <![endif]-->

<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="c/pr.css" media="print" /> 
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="c/au.css" media="aural" />

</head> <body id="baw">

<p class="cr"> you are here: <a href="neurok.html">home</a> &#62; 
<strong>bell's palsy</strong> </p>

<div id="ctr"> <div id="hd"> <h1> Neuroscience For Kids </h1> </div>

<div id="mn"> <h2>Bell's Palsy </h2>

<p><strong>By Kate DiNucci, Neuroscience for Kids Guest Writer<br />
April 18, 2023</strong></p>

<p> Weakness or loss of function of one side of the face is often a 
cause for concern because many people think it is a symptom of a stroke.  
Several conditions can cause weakness of one side of the face, including 
a brain tumor, myasthenia gravis, and Lyme disease. However, the most 
common cause of facial paralysis or weakness is Bell's palsy.</p>

<h3>What is Bell's Palsy?</h3>

<p>
<img src="gif/cn7.jpg" alt="facial nerve" class="flr" /> 
Bell's palsy is a neurological disorder caused by a dysfunction of 
the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII) that results in paralysis or 
weakness on one side of the face. The facial nerve connects your brain 
to the muscles in your face and controls facial movement and expression. 
Bell's palsy is also known as facial palsy, idiopathic peripheral 
facial palsy, or cranial mononeuropathy.</p>

<h3>Symptoms of Bell's Palsy</h3>

<p>Bell's palsy commonly presents as a sudden weakness or paralysis on 
one side of the face within a 48 to 72 hour period of the first 
symptoms. People with Bell's palsy may have trouble smiling or 
closing their eye on the affected side. Other symptoms may include 
increased sensitivity to sound on the affected side, headache, pain 
around the jaw or behind the ear, or loss of taste. Sometimes these 
symptoms may result in facial pain, excessive tears or saliva, or 
trouble eating and drinking. Symptoms may improve without treatment 
within a few weeks, with a full recovery typically in six months.</p>

<h3>Who gets Bell's Palsy?</h3>
<img src="gif/bellsp1.jpg" alt="facial pain" width="250" height="174" class="flr" /> 

<p>In the United States, approximately 40,000 people are affected by 
Bell's palsy each year.  The incidence of Bell's palsy is about the same 
in men and women and the most common age for people to get Bell's palsy 
is between 15 to 45 years old. Common risk factors include pregnancy, 
preeclampsia, obesity, hypertension, and diabetes. Although the exact 
cause of Bell's palsy is unknown, research has suggested an association 
between the condition and viral infections such as Lyme disease, 
sarcoidosis, chickenpox and shingles, infectious mononucleosis, herpes 
(both HSV-1 and HSV-2), HIV/AIDS, cytomegalovirus infections, mumps, the 
flu, and hand-foot-and-mouth disease. Therefore, impaired immunity, for 
example from stress, sleep deprivation, physical trauma, illness, or 
autoimmune syndrome, may put people at higher risk for Bell's palsy.</p>

<h3>How is Bell's Palsy diagnosed?</h3>

<p>Because the exact cause of Bell's palsy is unknown, diagnosing 
the disorder is usually made by a clinical examination while ruling out 
other causes of facial weakness or paralysis. During a clinical 
examination, a doctor will examine a person's facial muscles to 
determine the extent of the weakness. Other tests used to diagnose 
Bell's palsy:</p>

<img src="gif/catscan.gif" alt="imaging" class="flr" /> 

<ul>

<li>Electromyography (EMG): electrodes are placed into a muscle to 
assess nerve damage</li>

<li>Blood tests: To detect possible infection</li>

<li>Diagnostic imaging: magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed 
tomography (CT) to determine if there are anatomical abnormalities 
causing the symptoms.</li>

</ul>

<h3>Treating Bell's Palsy</h3>

<p>Bell's palsy often resolves on its own over time, however various 
treatments may be used to speed up recovery.  Steroids help reduce 
inflammation and swelling of the facial nerve, antiviral agents can help 
restore facial movement, analgesics (e.g., Aspirin or ibuprofen) can 
relieve pain, and eye drops can be used if there is difficulty closing 
the affected eye. Physical therapy, facial massage, or acupuncture may 
relieve symptoms in some people. In extreme cases, cosmetic or 
reconstructive surgery can correct pervasive facial paralysis.</p>

<h3>Preventing Bell's Palsy</h3>

<p>Because there is no known cause of Bell's palsy, there is no way to 
definitively prevent the disorder. A healthy lifestyle including a 
balanced diet, exercise, and seeking proper medical treatment for viral 
infections to help keep the immune system strong are all ways to keep 
the body in top shape.</p>

<p>References:</h3>
<ul>

<li><a 
href="https://www.ninds.nih.gov/health-information/disorders/bells-palsy">National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke - Bell's Palsy</a></li>

<li><a href="https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/bells-palsy/symptoms-causes/syc-20370028">Mayo Clinic - Bell's Palsy</a></li>

<li><a 
href="https://www.pennmedicine.org/for-patients-and-visitors/patient-information/conditions-treated-a-to-z/bells-palsy">Penn 
Medicine - What is Bell's Palsy</a></li>

</ul>

<p class="ftr"> Copyright &#169; 1996-2023, Eric H. Chudler All Rights 
Reserved.</p> 
 </div> </div>

<div id="nav"><p> <a href="neurok.html" title="return to home page" 
accesskey="1"> home</a> <em>|</em> <a href="index1.html" title="Search 
the Neuroscience for Kids Web Site" accesskey="4">search</a> <em>|</em> 
<a href="introb.html" title="the nervous system, the brain, spinal cord, 
neurons, senses" accesskey="x">explore</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="experi.html" title="lesson plans, demonstrations and games to help 
you learn about the nervous system" accesskey="p">experiment</a> 
<em>|</em> <a href="questions.html" title="do you have a question about 
the nervous system?" accesskey="q"> questions / answers</a> <em>|</em> 
<a href="mailto:chudler@u.washington.edu" title="please send comments 
and suggestions to Dr. Chudler"> contact</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="links.html" title="other places on the Internet to find out more 
about the nervous system" accesskey="l"> links</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="help.html" title="Neuroscience for Kids needs your help" 
accesskey="5"> donate</a> </p>

&#160;

<p> <a href="newslet.html" title="sign up to receive the neuroscience for 
kids newsletter" accesskey="9"> newsletter</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="baw.html" title="see what brain awareness week is all about" 
accesskey="a"> brain awareness week</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="inthenews.html" title="Current events and new discoveries in brain 
research" accesskey="n"> Neuroscience in the News</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="contest23.html" title="kids poetry writing contest" accesskey="o"> 
drawing contest</a> <em>|</em> <a href="books.html" title="on-line and 
off-line books and articles" accesskey="b"> books and articles</a> 
<em>|</em> <a href="jpuz.html" title="Free Electronic Neuroscience 
Postcards" accesskey="c"> postcards</a> <em>|</em> <a href="whowe.html" 
title="the people behind neuroscience for kids" accesskey="2"> about</a> 
<em>|</em> <a href="privacy.html" title="privacy statement" accesskey="6"> 
privacy</a> <em>|</em> <a href="disclaim.html" title="disclaimer notice" 
accesskey="7"> disclaimer</a> <em>|</em> <a href="map.html" title="site 
map" accesskey="3"> site map </a> </p> </div>

</body> </html>
 contentType 9 text/html url 52 http://faculty.washington.edu:80/chudler/bellsp.html responseCode 3 200 