meqorqlszawosarqqezanqqokilqdcxqfalekmfm length 5 30538 page 30538 <title>Philip Ball, The Self-Made Tapestry</title>

<cite><a href="../">The Bactra Review: Occasional and eclectic book reviews by Cosma Shalizi</a></cite> &nbsp; <strong>67</strong>

<h1>The Self-Made Tapestry</h1>

<h2>Pattern Formation in Nature</h2>

<h2><em>by</em> <a href="../authors.html#philip-ball">Philip Ball</a></h2>

Oxford UP, 1999

<hr>

<h4>The Blind Snowflake-Maker</h4>

Nobody looks at a snowflake and thinks of a snowflake-maker, of someone who
deliberately set every bit of ice <em>just so.</em> Nor, looking at a
sand-dune, do we imagine a dune-maker.  Most of us have even gotten over
vortex-makers, though really spectacular ones (like hurricanes) tempt us.  We
accept as a fact of life that pattern happens.  But why, or rather when and
how?  It's also a fact of life that uncoordinated forces usually just make a
mess --- why do they sometimes lead to regular, even elegant patterns instead?
In physical contexts, this is called "pattern formation" or
"self-organization."  The former term is tied to nuts-and-bolts questions ---
what distinguishes pattern-forming situations from the mess-making ones?  what
are the mechanisms through which patterns form?  when are these mechanisms at
work?  how do they connect to fundamental physics? --- rather than the more
nebulous ones about <a href="../holland-on-emergence/">Emergence</a> and Order
and Meaning associated (perhaps wrongly) with "self-organization," so we'll
stick to the former.  (People also speak of biological development as "pattern
formation," but here we'll use the slightly old-fashioned name
"morphogenesis" to avoid confusion.)  Pattern formation has, mostly since the
1960s, become a large, growing and increasingly important part of modern
physical science, one relevant to everyday phenomena and, even without the
nebulosities, tied to Deep Issues.  Despite this, despite even the opportunity
for really neat pictures, <a href="competition.html">there hasn't been a single
decent popular book on it</a>, one which explains the science adequately in lay
terms and leaves out the <a
href="http://www.voltaire.ox.ac.uk/tx/Candide/candide01.html">metaphysico-theologo-cosmolonigology</a>.
Ball's book (need I say it?) fills this distressing gap, and does so almost
perfectly.

<P>The science, to start with, is all up-to-date and correct.  The descriptions
of particular mechanisms and processes are clear, making effective use of
diagrams and analogy with everyday physical experience, with (despite fears
raised by the title) next to no reliance on metaphor.  Though Ball describes a
great many cellular automata rules which have been used to model these
processes (with enough detail to implement them; a collection of such programs
would've made a nice accompaniment to the book), his emphasis is refreshingly
on things in Nature or the lab, and well-developed physical theories, rather
than on computer models which are merely reminiscent of them.  More abstract
concepts, like symmetry, symmetry-breaking and minimization principles are also
handled well, but very briskly --- the emphasis is on the physics (and the
chemistry!), and curious readers are referred to <a
href="weyl-note.html">Weyl's classic on symmetry, and Stewart and Golubitsky's
classic-to-be on broken symmetry</a>.  (All this is exemplary.)

<P>The coverage of particular pattern-formers, while not quite comprehensive,
comes very close.  Only two --- Rayleigh-Bernard convection, and the
Belusov-Zhabotinsky reagent --- are commonly discussed in the non-specialized
literature.  They're here, but so is lots of other stuff.  Chapter two covers
surface and interface phenomena, from soap-bubbles through heads of beer to the
(often literally) convoluted structures built by surfactant molecules in three
dimensions, and no less strange effects achieved in Langmuir films, effectively
two-dimensional soaps.  (This chapter also covers honeycombs, and introduces
the natural selection vs. pattern formation theme, of which much more below.)
Chapter three is on chemical oscillators and waves (including the
aforementioned BZ reagent, and the melancholy story of Belusov), and their ties
to other "excitable media," like some kinds of combustion, the growth of
certain species of bacteria in culture media, heart muscle and nerve cells, and
even one phase in the life-cycle of the remarkable cellular slime mold
<em>Dictyostelium discoideum.</em> Chapter four brings together more biological
instances --- mammalian coat-markings and molluscan shells (both interpreted as
"activator-inhibitor" systems, using ideas originally going back to Alan
Turing), the wings of butterflies and the body-plans of fruit flies.  Chapter
five discusses "dendritic growths" --- mineral dendrites, snowflakes, yet
other kinds of bacterial colonies, and other things which grow outward by
spikes and branches.  These are very similar to crack and fracture patterns,
the subject of chapter six, and may be related to river-basins.  This brings us
to the subject of fluid flow (chapter seven), where we get to look at
convective flows (like Rayleigh-Bernard convection) and eddies and turbulent
flows (which are, famously, a fabulous mess).  Chapter eight is on granular
materials like sand, rice, and mixed nuts, which can also flow, and finally
chapter nine discusses spatial ecology, or anyhow models of it.  I am greedy
enough of to want more --- liquid crystals, self-assembly, and "birds and
bees" topics like flocking and the construction of termite mounds --- but not
too much more.

<P>Ball's general approach, in these chapters, is to open with some striking
phenomenon, e.g., mineral dendrites, which look so organic that they're often
mistaken for fossil plants, say a little bit about why it is puzzling (the
dendrites are made of crystals, normally by-words for rectilinear regularity),
and then go on the mechanisms which produce them, or anyhow are thought to do
so.  (He is good at indicating just how much is conjectural in each case.)  The
mechanics are often reasonably involved mathematically, but Ball does an
excellent job of getting the "essential physics" (i.e. the hand-waving bits)
across.  Dendrites, for instance, grow by a process of accretion, with randomly
moving particles attaching themselves to the cluster at its edges.
	<blockquote>It isn't hard to see why this model produces very imperfect,
irregular clusters, since aggregation takes place following random diffusion.
But why are the clusters branched?  We could perhaps imagine instead the
formation of a dense mass with a highly irregular edge, like a spreading ink
blot.  Why is this not what happens?
	<P>The answer is that the model possesses an instability that amplifies
any small bumps or irregularities, causing them to extend into fingers rather
than becoming smoothed out again.... [I]t's not hard to imagine that a particle
taking a tortuous, meandering path through the surrounding medium is likely to
encounter one of the branch tips before being able to penetrate very far down
the channels between them.  So once they are formed, the branches tend to grow
from their tips while the gaps in between them get even less accessible to new
particles.
	<P>Preferential growth at a tip ensures that any tiny bumps formed by
chance at the cluster surface will have a tendency to grow faster than flat
parts of the surface, because there is a better chance that a randomly
diffusing particle will hit it.  And crucially, this growth advantage is
self-enhancing --- the more the bump develops, the greater the chance of new
particles striking and sticking to it.  The probability of this is always
greatest at the very tip of the bump, since this is the most exposed part.  So
the slightest small bump soon grows into a sharp finger.  Because
irregularities are springing up by chance all over the surface all the time,
the deposit becomes increasingly branched, with each new tip constantly
sprouting extra appendages. [p. 114]</blockquote>
	(As Ball goes on to say, it's crucial that the particles move randomly.  A
low density of diffusing particles is also crucial, otherwise the law of large
numbers comes into play and swamps the irregular growth.)  Having explained the
key mechanism in such a way, he proceeds to other phenomena where a similar
process is at work --- deposition of metals about an electrode, forcing one
fluid into another, more viscous one, the accretion of snowflakes about an
initial seed of dust.  Along the way, he explains how the mechanism must be
changed to accommodate the peculiarities of these different systems; also the
physical reasons for their having such similar dynamics.  This raises the
question of why there are such similarities in the behavior of things at least
as different as chalk and cheese.  Like Ball, we'll save that question for the
very end, after we've looked at how, if at all, pattern formation connects to
biology --- one of the promised Deep Issues.

<P>I began by talking about how the idea of a snowflake-maker is one which is
repugnant to our understandings.  On the other hand, we are reluctant to
<em>not</em> infer a watch-maker from a watch, and historically nothing has
been easier than to proceed from an organism to its Maker.  We find, let us
say, a fluke (<em>Bilharzia mansoni</em>) in our neighbor's intestine.  We
observe the elegant simplicity of its oral and ventral suckers, the precision
with which its genital pore finds the veins leading to the kidneys and the
efficiency with which it then expels eggs (up to three hundred a day), the
speed with which its cercariae penetrate human skin to colonize a new host.  We
conclude that here, manifestly, is a work from the Hand of a Great Artificer
--- in a word, we infer a Fluke-Maker from flukes.  As <a
href="http://www.utm.edu/research/hume/wri/dialogue/dialogue.htm">David
Hume</a> pointed out, there is nothing to say that there is only one
Fluke-Maker, or that the Fluke-Maker is the same as the Tapeworm-Maker or the
Celery-Maker or (the real point) the Maker of People.  But still, what, after
all, is the alternative?

<P>Well, the one <em>we</em> now subscribe to for people, flukes, tapeworms and
celery is natural selection.  It is, in Dawkins's famous phrase, a
<em>blind</em> watchmaker, which is good (at least for us infidels), but it's
still a watchmaker, shaping our ends (and means), rough-hew them though
variation will.  It's tempting to ask if there's a way of avoiding both
fluke-makers and watch-makers.  Might not something even blinder --- more
mechanical, more mindless, more <em>unclubbable</em> --- than natural selection
yet be able to create patterns and organization?

<P>Enter snowflakes.  Enter, also, D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson, who in 1917
published a book, <cite><a href="growth-and-form-note.html">On Growth and
Form,</a></cite> which has haunted all discussion of these matters ever since.
Thompson's aimed to show that huge chunks of biology are simply the
consequences of physics and (less often) chemistry.  When he wrote that "the
form of an object is a `diagram of forces,' in this sense at least, that from
it we can judge of or deduce the forces that are acting or have acted upon
it," he meant <em>forces.</em> His accounts of the physics behind
morphogenesis were ingenious, extremely elegant, very convincing and,
significantly, aimed at very large features of the organism: the architecture
of the skeleton, the curve of horns or shells, the outline of the organism as a
whole.  Most of us are resigned to abandoning biochemical details to crawling
molecular chaos, but these are supposed to be more mysterious and inspiring
affairs.  Thompson tried to explain them using little that a second-year
physics undergrad wouldn't know.  (Thompson's anti-reductionist admirers seldom
put it this way.)  In particular, Thompson made a point of not invoking natural
selection, indeed of leaving any kind of history out of the story.  "A
snow-crystal is the same today as when the first snows fell": so, too, the
basic forces acting upon organisms, so why bring history into it?  The early
years of this century are littered with biologists with little use for natural
selection; they are now almost all deservedly forgotten.  Thompson owes his
continuing influence to the fact that <em>his</em> alternative doesn't beg
questions at every turn.  (Also, of course, he wrote beautifully, better than
the poets of his day.)

<P>Since Thompson's day, then, there has been a tension in the study of
morphogenesis between evolution and (other kinds of?) self-organization, and
this is one of Ball's themes, though not the leading one.  Partly it is an
argument about logical and theoretical questions --- what is natural selection
competent to explain?  what features of organisms could not be modified by
selection? to what extent is self-organization unavoidable? --- and partly it's
about where the balance between self-organization and evolution lies in
actually existing organisms.

<P>The case for the self-organizers can be put very strongly, at least for
multicellular organisms, for metazoans.  These are not bloated sacks of
protoplasm but (as the biologist say) "differentiated" --- there are
different chemicals in different parts of the body.  This in itself could be
achieved without much effort; shake up a bunch of marbles in a box and there
will be more of one color of marble in one corner, more of a different color in
another corner.  But mere chance won't give us <em>enough</em> differentiation,
and it won't give us a reliable pattern of differentiation; it would be as
though every fertilized egg was equally liable to turn into a frog, an oak,
<em>Bilharzia</em> or something out of Lovecraft.  So there has to be some
particular differentiating influence.  It cannot be the genes (on which natural
selection acts), since genes only encode information about proteins, i.e. about
what chemicals to make, not where to put them.  So it would seem that
differentiation, morphogenesis, <em>must</em> be due to some internal process,
some reaction of the proteins and their associated chemicals which sorts out
what goes where; but this is to say that there needs to be spontaneous pattern
formation, that development must be self-organizing.

<P>It may, admittedly, look like we're in trouble with some obvious facts, that
this argument leaves genes and natural selection with no purchase at all on
morphogenesis.  But not even the most enthusiastic of the self-organizers, the
ones with the least use for Darwin (e.g., Brian Goodwin) goes that far.  It's
very clear that developmental traits can be inherited.  Individual mutations
can cause the organism to grow six well-formed fingers on each hand (in human
beings), or legs in place of antennae (in fruit flies); somehow changes in one
protein have to ratchet up into large modifications of the organism.  One way
to achieve this is to recognize that the same mechanism can form many different
patterns depending on its parameters, which, in the case of morphogenesis, will
involve the chemical properties of the proteins and protein-products in the
embryo, which are just what the genes control.  The genes twiddle the knobs, so
to speak, and then let self-organization do its voodoo.

<P>This is a pretty convincing line of argument; at least, I'd like to think
so, since it convinced me for years.  No longer; let me try to say why with a
fairly concrete example.  There is, as I mentioned, a very nice theory about
the markings of mammalian coats, developed by Hans Meinhardt and his
collaborators.  It explains them through spontaneous pattern formation, using
some ideas invented by Alan Turing in the 1950s, and, depending on the
parameters of these "activator-inhibitor" systems, they can give you
tiger-stripes, or leopard-spots, or even giraffe-blotches, with controllable
size, density, wiggliness, etc.  Suppose we established that this is really the
mechanism at work; could we then finally close the books on how the leopard got
its spots?  No: it is a conspicuous fact (or, rather, an inconspicuous one)
that tigers are tiger-striped, while leopards and leopard-spotted, and there is
nothing in the activator-inhibitor story to say why this should be so.  It's
not enough for a pattern to form, it must also function.  <a
href="ashby.html">Pattern formation is in general unable to create
adaptations</a>, to produce something which <em>fits</em> with the organism's
environment.  The case of tiger-stripes and leopard-spots could be resolved by
appealing to parameter-tuning, as above, but this doesn't go far enough.  There
are, after all, many, many different pattern-forming mechanisms, producing many
different sorts of patterns.  Assuming an organism employs such a mechanism,
why that one rather than another, producing very different patterns?  The only
answer, so far as I can see, is that, in the organism's environment, the
patterns it makes are more adaptive than those of rival mechanism.  (Lipids are
just as capable of forming open "plumber's nightmare" surfaces as closed
vesicles; cell walls are vesicles because it helps an organism if it doesn't
leak all over creation.)  So even the <em>kind</em> of self-organization which
happens in morphogenesis is under evolutionary control.

<P>If, that is, there is any self-organization happening at all.  We've been
tacitly arguing as though the embryo really was a featureless sack of
protoplasm in an equally featureless environment; an assumption, admittedly,
that physicists find it very natural to make.  Nonetheless, it is not so; as
Ball nicely puts it (p. 101) "broken symmetry is passed from generation to
generation," often by reasonably complicated means.  Mother Nature was not,
alas, schooled at the Bauhaus or MIT, and so cares less about <em>elegance</em>
than <em>cost-effectiveness,</em> and is perfectly happy to do something in a
complicated, messy way if it's cheap at the price.  (This is part of why charts
of metabolic reaction pathways cover whole walls in biology labs.)  There is no
reason to think that it's generally cheaper or more reliable to use
self-organization than not, and so no reason to expect to encounter it very
often in morphogenesis.  This is in line with a final conspicuous absence.  The
experimental study of biological development is more than a hundred years old
now, and advances in it fill scores of fat journals every month.  In all this
vast wealth of detail, there is not a <em>single</em> case where a kind of
self-organization proposed by theorists has been confirmed (though there are a
few likely-looking candidates), and many cases where self-organization is
definitely known not to take place.  As the old joke says, "If it's slimy it's
biology, if it stinks it's chemistry, and if it doesn't work it's physics."

<P>This doesn't mean, of course, that the whole exercise has been a waste of
time, much less that there is no role for theory in developmental biology, that
the current find-a-gene-sequence-it-and-move-on mania is the last word on the
subject.  Between the DNA and the extra fingers there are a whole host of
biophysical problems from the shapes of molecules to the mechanical properties
of muscles which we need to solve before our knowledge of morphogenesis will be
reasonably complete.  As a theoretical physicist interested in biology and
anxious about long-term employment, I find this comforting.

<P>Still, this rejection of the advances of the profession rankles; let us
abandon it for the more pleasant topic of Ball's concluding chapter, that of
general principles governing pattern formation.  This is the question, already
raised, of why it is that things which are so very different from each other
physically proceed along very similar routes to very similar patterns.  Ball
retells the orthodox Instability Story, following <a
href="../cross-and-hohenberg/">Mark Cross and Pierre Hohenberg</a> (with asides
from the admirable, and admirably acerbic, Rolf Landauer).  Briefly, it goes
like this.  We imagine our favorite pattern former before it has formed any
pattern --- featureless, homogeneous, and consequently symmetrical (since there
is nothing to distinguish one part of it from another).  But this can only be
on-average homogeneity; there will always be random fluctuations, more or less
pronounced, with different spatial structures.  In one range of the values of
the parameters (representing, here, the properties of the materials and the
environmental conditions), these fluctuations will all tend to decay and die
off, regardless of their shape; we say that the featureless configuration is a
<em>stable state.</em> In another parameter-region, certain kinds of
fluctuations will actually be amplified, the system will assume the shape of
one of the faster-growing fluctuations, and we go from the now-unstable
featureless state to a newly-stable patterned state; the symmetry will be
broken.  (There will actually be many stable patterned states, as many as there
are ways of breaking the original symmetry; which one is attained is in the lap
of the gods.)  Clearly, there will be a border between these two
parameter-regions, parameter values at which one state becomes stable and the
other unstable; at these points the system is said to "bifurcate."  Two
dynamical systems are said to belong to the same bifurcation class if, close to
the threshold, they can both be approximated by equations of the same form; in
the case of pattern-formers, this means that they'll have similar
configurations, at least close to their thresholds.  It is a remarkable fact
that "generic" dynamical systems, ones without some mathematically peculiar
properties, fall into a fairly small number of bifurcation classes.  But this
means that we should expect only a fairly small number of different types of
patterns to form from spontaneous instabilities.

<P>The Instability Story is a nice one, even in this Cliff Notes version, and
better still in the original, with the math.  (The approximations used close to
bifurcation points, for instance, let us make very good fits to experimental
data, with only one or two adjustable parameters.)  We can be confident that
it's true, as far as it goes, but we can also be confident that it doesn't go
all the way, that it must be just part of a larger epic.  Let's leave to one
side the question of why dynamics which are generic in the mathematical sense
should be common in the Realized World; we might as well take a number and get
in line behind Plato to explain why math works at all.  It's more troubling
that the similarity of pattern persists far from the onset of instability, at
which point bifurcation classes are irrelevant.  Mathematical caveats (like the
suitability of Fourier decomposition) keep the Instability Story from applying
to things like dendritic growth (and so our original snowflakes).  Other kinds
of pattern, like the much-studied spiral waves of the Belusov-Zhabotinsky
reagent, <a href="bz-stability.html">simply do not form via spontaneous
instabilities</a>.  So if the Instability Story is not the whole story, what
is?

<P>One idea, popular in the '60s and '70s, was advanced by Ilya Prigogine and
his minions (very well: followers).  Pattern formation, said Prigogine, was a
sequel to thermodynamics.  In thermodynamic equilibrium, the stable state is
that of minimum free energy.  This can be symmetric or not, depending; the
theory of symmetry-breaking was actually developed for handling the switch from
one kind of equilibrium state to another.  Near equilibrium, the stable state
was supposed to be the one which minimized the rate at which <a
href="entropy-production-note.html">free energy was dissipated into waste
heat</a>, a rate which could be calculated using methods which Lars Onsager
developed in the 1930s, thereby initiating non-equilibrium thermodynamics.
(Ball is the only popular writer on self-organization I know of who gets this
point of priority correct.)  Further from equilibrium, things were a bit more
complicated (involving some second derivatives), but stability was still
supposed to be a matter of minimizing a quantity related to the free energy.
Like many attempts at writing sequels to classics, it did not go over well.
The theory has been been useless experimentally; worse, a result of Landauer's
(he calls it the "blow-torch theorem") shows that <em>no</em>
stability-from-minimization story can be correct out of equilibrium.

<P>Prigogine has gone from penning sequels to thermodynamics to attempting to
vindicate Bergson, or perhaps Dr. Pangloss; there is no need to follow him in
these excursions, <a href="../../notebooks/prigogine.html">at any rate not
here</a>.  There is, however, another, more recent story which purports to
explain <cite><a href="bak-note.html">How Nature Works</a>,</cite> namely Per
Bak's system of self-organized criticality.  Ball examines it in chapter eight,
on granular materials, its original setting being avalanches in sand-piles.  He
dismisses its grander pretensions (i.e. most of them) for good and cogent
reasons, though not, to my mind, the <a href="son-of-soc.html">most
damning</a>.  There is really no very good explanation for the commonalities of
far-from-threshold patterns at this point.

<P>Not that this is too surprising.  The serious study of pattern formation is,
as I said, only a few decades old.  Hunting for ancestors and predecessors we
find a number of late 19th century and early 20th century luminaries like Lord
Rayleigh, Henri Poincar&eacute; and <a
href="../batchelor-on-taylor/">G. I. Taylor</a>; but very little for the first
two thirds, maybe even the first three quarters, of this century.  Why not?
Why so slow?  One answer is of course quantum mechanics.  Look at the options
before a young physicist circa 1930.  He could follow someone like Taylor, and
wrack his brains trying to understand what happens to a fluid when you put it
between two cylinders and spin one of them.  Or he could follow Heisenberg or
Oppenheimer, and figure out the most fundamental properties of matter, and use
that knowledge to say why the stars shine and why materials constitute
themselves the way they do.  For anyone with ambition (to say nothing of our
endemic hubris), this was hardly a choice, at least until quantum theory began
to hit the point of diminishing returns.  The other answer, the one Ball
emphasizes, is that our progress in understanding pattern formation relies on
tools from dynamics and statistical mechanics which were not themselves
developed until the last few decades.  The statistical-mechanical methods
themselves are in part adaptations of tools from quantum mechanics...

<P>This may be the Cunning of Reason, or dumb luck (is there a difference?); it
also suggests a different way of looking at the puzzle of why so many different
things produce similar patterns.  In the words of an applied math professor I
had as an undergraduate:
	<blockquote>Feynman has this lovely passage about how it's so wonderful
and mysterious that Nature uses the same mathematics over and over again. [In
fact he has several; Ball quotes one.] I say that's total EXPLETIVE
EXPLETIVE. It's just because the EXPLETIVE physicist don't know any EXPLETIVE
math that they keep using the same EXPLETIVE equations over and EXPLETIVE over
again.</blockquote>
	(We never did figure out if Prof. N. had Tourette's syndrome, or was just
on some kind of speed.)  More printably, we are perhaps going at this from the
wrong end.  It's not that Nature has only a few basic forms available to her;
it's that there aren't very many devices in the physicist's toolkit, so there
are few forms we can handle.  Science being the art of the soluble, we
concentrate our attention on those forms, which, lo and behold, have much in
common with each other.  As we add more tools to our kit --- say, those of
bifurcation theory and symmetry breaking --- we become able to handle more
diverse phenomena.  Mullah Nasruddin famously looked for things where the light
was best --- but at least he wasn't shocked that everything he saw was so well
lit!

<P>Whether this rather deflating story is true, or there's some juicier account
to be given of common patterns, I couldn't begin to say.  Either way, it's
clear that we are beginning to understand how patterns form in nature, without
intent or design, in a way which fits very nicely with the rest of our
mechanistic understanding of the physical world.  This is an extremely exciting
development, one with a claim on the attention and interest not just of
scientists but the educated public at large.  Ball's book is the first to
really try to get across that understanding.  Since it is also well-written,
accurate, and well-illustrated, it is going to be extremely hard to improve
upon, and deserves a wide audience for many years to come.

<hr><em>Disclaimer</em>: I asked for, and got, a review copy of this book from
the publisher, but I have no stake in its success.

<hr><em>Errata</em>: p. 51n, decrease of free energy is strictly equivalent to
increase of entropy only if the total (mechanical) energy is held constant;
p. 57, for "1960s," read "1950s" (not even von Neumann did math from beyond
the grave); p. 128, describing al-Khwarizmi as "Moorish" is a bit odd, since
he was from (as his name indicates) Khwarazm in modern Uzbekistan, and while
Europeans learned about 0 and place-value notation from his <cite>Kitab
al-hisab al-Hind</cite>, i.e., <cite>Book on the Hindu Art of Reckoning,</cite>
the title alone is enough to show that he invented neither; p. 202, for
"mid-1900s", read "mid-1990s"; p. 241, for "1930s" read "1950s".

<hr>vii + 285 pp., 24 color plates, abundant black-and-white photos and
diagrams, appendix of experiments, partial bibliography, index of personal
names and topics.

<br><a href="../subjects/popular-science.html">Popular Science</a> /
	<a href="../subjects/self-organization.html">Self-Organization,
Complexity, etc.</a>

<br>In print as a hardback, US$37.50, ISBN 0-19-850244-3 [<a
href="http://www.powells.com/cgi-bin/partner?partner_id=27627&cgi=product&isbn=0198502443">buy
from Powell's</a>] and as a paperback, US$19.95, ISBN 0-19-850243-5 [<a
href="http://www.powells.com/cgi-bin/partner?partner_id=27627&cgi=product&isbn=0198502435">buy
from Powell's</a>], LoC QH491 B35

<hr>11 December 1998 / 21 January 1999

<br>Thanks to Aryaman Shalizi for straightening out my thinking on
morphogenesis, and comments on this review.
 contentType 9 text/html url 48 http://bactra.org:80/reviews/self-made-tapestry/ responseCode 3 200 