miesvmzmlqxgkekkaqainayepsnkdqqccismuizk length 5 17763 page 17763 <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.0 Transitional//EN"
 "http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-html40/loose.dtd">
<html>
<head>
<title>Botswana History Page 14: Tourism</title>
<meta name="description" content="Botswana history: Tourism. Includes information and links for tourists.">
<meta name="keywords" content="Botswana tourism, holidays, travel, Africa, Okavango Delta, Kalahari desert, Kgalagadi, Chobe, Tsodilo, Gemsbok national park, Khutse, Maun, Gaborone, Francistown, Serowe, Ghanzi, Gantsi, Ngami, Ngamiland, Makgadikgadi , pans, Nxai, Moremi, Neil Parsons, Q. N. Parsons, Southern Africa, University of Botswana History Department">
<style type="text/css">
<!--
P.backto
   {
   background-color: #F5FFFA;
   border: double thin #0000FF;
   padding: 6px;
   width: 35%;
   text-align: center;
   font-size: smaller;
   }
h2, h3, h4
   {
   background-color: #CCFFFF;
   padding: 12px;
   }
h2
   {
   width: 80%;
   }
h3
   {
   width: 60%;
   }
h4
   {
   width: 45%;
   }
-->
</style>

</head>
<body bgcolor="#FFFFF0" text="#000000">
<div align="center">
<table width="100%" summary="Layout table for heading: Tourism">
<tr>
<td width="100%" height="30" bgcolor="#00CCFF">
<center><big>Botswana History Pages, by Neil Parsons</big></center>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td width="100%" height="5" bgcolor="#FFFFFF"></td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td width="100%" height="50" bgcolor="#000000">
<center>
<h1><font color="#FFFFFF">14: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tourism</font></h1>
</center>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td width="100%" height="5" bgcolor="#FFFFFF"></td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td width="100%" height="30" bgcolor="#00CCFF">&nbsp;</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>

<center><a href="bhpindex.htm">To Index</a> &nbsp;|&nbsp; <a name=
"doc_top" href="#doc_end">To end of page</a> &nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href=
"../index.html">Back to History Home Page</a></center>

<center>
<p><font size="2"><a href="bhp1.htm">1: Brief History of
Botswana</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp2.htm">2: Comments and
Links</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp3.htm">
3:Archaeology</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp4.htm">4:
Culture</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp5.htm">5:
Economy</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp6.htm">6:
Education</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp7.htm">7:
Geography</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp;<br>
<a href="bhp8.htm">8: Language</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp9.htm">
9: Literature</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp10.htm">
10:Politics</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp11.htm">11:
Religion</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp12.htm">12:
Science</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp13.htm">13:
Society</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp14.htm">14:
Tourism</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp15.htm">15:
Media</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp;</font></p>
</center>

<hr>
<a name="contents" href="#contents"><b>Contents</b></a> 

<ul>
<li><a href="#nw">Tourism in Northern/Western Botswana</a></li>

<li><a href="#es">Tourism in Eastern/Southern Botswana</a></li>

<li><a href="#links_chobe">Tourism Links - Chobe &amp;
Okavango</a></li>

<li><a href="#links_general">Tourism Links - General
Botswana</a></li>
</ul>

<hr>
<p><a name="see-also"><b><big><font color="#CC0000">See also on this site:</font></big></b></a></p> 
<ul>
<li><a href="bhp14d1.htm">Supplementary document 1: The
Missionaries' Road</a> (notes for a road trip)</li>
<li>Our <a href="../about/about0.htm">"About Botswana" pages</a>: information for prospective visitors or students,
including page on <a href="../about/tour/hctour0.htm">Historical and cultural tourism</a></li>
<li><a href="lochis.htm">Local history sources</a> (this includes
information on places of interest in various regions of
Botswana)</li>
</ul>
<hr>
<p>Notes and Comments</p>

<p>Provisional version by Neil Parsons April 1999</p>

<p>Long-distance travel for purposes of trade goes back a thousand
years in Botswana. Shells and beads from the east coast of Africa
were being traded as far as the Tsodilo hills, in north-western
Botswana, by the 8th century AD. In the later 18th century Kgosi
Motswasele of the Bakwena, in the south-east of Botswana, was
famous as a well-travelled man because of his journeys to Maputo
Bay and back. But modern tourism is an outgrowth of industrial
society, offering temporary recreation abroad - first in the later
18th century to aristocrats and gentry on 'grand tours', and later
to bourgeois and proles on 'package tours'.</p>

<p>Plans for tourism on the Chobe were laid in the 1930s, but did
not really materialize until the 1960s - receiving great
international publicity in the early 1970s when the film stars
Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton re-married at Kasane. The first
modern safari camps on the Okavango delta were also constructed in
the later 1960s, and the boom for high-cost/low-density tourism in
the swamps began in the 1970s.</p>

<hr>
<p class="backto"><a name="nw" href="#contents">Back to contents</a></p>

<h2>TOURISM IN NORTHERN/ WESTERN BOTSWANA</h2>

<p>Tourism is at present largely confined to the northern half of
Botswana, and really indeed to the north-western quarter where lie
of the marshes of the Okavango delta and the Chobe river close to
Victoria Falls. Most of the web-sites on Botswana are dedicated to
these areas, which have little practical connection with the rest
of Botswana. Safari camps are enclaves in remote parts patronized
by foreign tourists and run by white South Africans from northern
Johannesburg, or by former "pink elephants" from East Africa.</p>

<p>Just as the visitor to New York City may conclude that
everything there is culture created by humans with no nature left
surviving, so the visitor to the Okavango marshes may get the
impression that all there is wild nature untamed by culture. Both
visitors, of course, would be wrong.</p>

<p>Only a few hundred years ago the Okavango lake and marshes
stretched almost up to the Tsodilo hills, which were occupied by
fishing people and cattle herders and crop farmers. The climate has
changed, with less rainfall coming down river from the Angola
highlands. The very nature of the Okavango marshes has changed too.
The primary agent of change was the hippo. Hippos congregated and
bashed their way through the papyrus, opening and closing channels.
One result was that water flowed in quantity down the eastern side
of the delta to form what was called Lake Ngami (Nghabe). But over
the past century and a half, with the rise of commercial hunting
with firearms, the hippos have thinned in number. The channels to
Lake Ngami, and more recently down the eastern side of the delta to
Maun and the Boteti river, have become choked with papyrus and have
dried up. The impact of human culture has remade the nature of the
Okavango delta.</p>

<p>The very savannah itself seems in part to be a product of human
culture. For up to a million years people have been burning it, to
make it grow new grass for the grazing livestock they cherish so
much. One result has been the proliferation of thorny fire-
resistant bush almost everywhere. The situation has grown ever more
acute over the past two thousand years, particularly along
water-courses, because of people's firewood and building-wood
needs. Extensive farming cutting into surface of the earth has also
increased the run-off of sandy soil into river beds. Hence all
those sand-bed rivers that are marked as dotted blue lines on the
map.</p>

<hr>
<p class="backto"><a name="es" href="#contents">Back to contents</a></p>

<h2>TOURISM IN EASTERN/ SOUTHERN BOTSWANA</h2>

<p>The rest of Botswana is not really set up for tourists. There
are few thatched luxury lodges along the lines of northern
Botswana. Though there are some good restaurants in the capital
city, Gaborone only has conventional hotels modelled on Holiday
Inns and Sheratons. Hotels elsewhere are often pretty run down.
People in eastern Botswana are unused to tourists and their habits.
Many officials and policeman cling to outdated ideas of
infiltration by apartheid regime saboteurs. You are still not
allowed to take photographs outside parliament and government
offices (including post offices!).</p>

<p>The golden rule, as in any other tourist-unfrequented place in
the world, is to first greet people politely and then ask their
permission to go here or there and to take a photograph. Once they
are given your respect, people are friendly and helpful.</p>

<p>The tourists who come to Botswana are wildlife tourists, who
also take in neighbouring parts of Southern Africa. The brand-names
that attract them to Botswana are <b>Okavango</b> and <b>
Kalahari</b>, presenting contrasting images of marsh and desert -
and to a lesser extent <b>Chobe</b>, the river that connects with
the Zambezi and thus with Victoria Falls.</p>

<p>Cultural tourism remains almost unexploited. The only
internationally recognisable brand-name is <b>Bushman</b>. Apart
from conjuring up imprecise and distorted 'ethnic' images, the name
is intensely embarrassing for the government of Botswana - because
it denotes the neglected poorest of the rural poor in a free
enterprise democratic society.</p>

<p>Historically-oriented tourism, on the other hand, poses no such
threat. Botswana has significant attractions for tourists
interested in the stone architecture of Great Zimbabwe, the life
and travels of Dr. <b>David Livingstone</b>, Cecil Rhodes' invasion
of Zimbabwe (1890-93), the Jameson Raid (1895-96), the <b>South
African War</b> (1899-1902), and the German war against the Nama
and Herero (1904-05). All of these overlap with neighbouring
countries, but there are also great narratives of Botswana history
with which the world needs first to be familiarized by books and
films.</p>

<p>For an indication of how a historically-oriented tour by car
might be planned, see the <a href="bhp14d1.htm">Missionaries'
Road</a> supplement to this page.</p>

<hr>
<p class="backto"><a name="links_chobe" href="#contents">Back to contents</a></p>

<h2>TOURISM LINKS - OKAVANGO AND CHOBE</h2>

<p>The grandaddy of environmental organizations in Botswana is the
Gaborone-based <a href=
"http://www.udel.edu/IntlProg/africa/index.html">Kalahari
Conservation Society</a> (with very brief pages on the people of
the Okavango etc.).</p>

<p>Conventional tourist sites aimed at high-cost package wildlife
tourists are headed by Ecoafrica.com, apparently South African
sourced. Its <a href=
"http://www.ecoafrica.com/africa/south/btsw.htm">Botswana</a> page
has informative text without pictures on wildlife parks and
reserves (Chobe national, Gemsbok national, Khutse and Central,
Ngami. Makgadikgadi and Nxai, Maun, Moremi, Okavango, and Tsodilo)
plus links to safari lodges, safari companies, and park
reservations. Its main human concern is with Bushmen or San people.
Package tours are listed with prices in US dollars and titles like
'Botswana a la Hemingway'.</p>

<p>GORP (Great Outdoors Recreation Pages) has a grandly named <a
href="http://www.gorp.com/gorp/location/africa/botswana.htm">GORP -
Botswana Resource Listings</a> page which lists eleven links with
US travel agencies (in New York, Houston etc.) offering deals to
Botswana. Plus two extra pages: one about wildlife watching
extracted from the South African book 'Engen Guide to Adventure
Travel in Southern Africa',and one from a Texas source about <a
href=
"http://www.gorp.com/gorp/location/africa/botswana/birding.htm">
birding</a> (sic - here meaning watching rather than catching) in
the Okavango delta. "Africa's Savage Oasis" at <a href=
"http://www.nationalgeographic.com/features/96/okavango/index/html">
National Geographic</a> turns out to be an Okavango video.</p>

<p>While we're on Okavango and Chobe, don't forget the Maun-based
<a href="http://www.stud.ntnu.no/~skjetnep/opwt">Okavango People's Wildlife Trust</a>,
and the Johannesburg-based <a href="http://www.stud.ntnu.no/~skjetnep/owls.html">Okavango Wildlife Society</a> site, with lots of links which takes you to news
stories on controversial topics like the impact of Veterinary
Fencing. It was that page which alterted me to the International
Rivers Network <a href="http://www.irn.org/programs/okavango/index.html">Okavango Delta Campaign</a> page with lots more links.</p>

<p>If you are interested in the peoples of the Okavango, with the
strange exclusion of the old Tawana ruling group at Maun, go to <a
href="http://www.mindspring.com/~johnbock/index.html">Okavango
Delta Peoples of Botswana</a>. It covers, in fascinating detail,
the culture and history of Bugawe, Dxeriku, Hambukushu, Wayeyi,and
Xanekwe peoples. This web-site was constructed by John Bock in
1992, and was last modified on 3 April 1999.</p>

<p>The Botswana page at <a href="http://www.african-safari.com">
Africa Safari.Com</a> out of Massachusetts has pictures but little
text, with links to safari lodges in the Okavango, Moremi, Savuti
and Linyanti, Chobe, Makgadikgadi, and Zimbabwe.</p>

<p>The <a href="http://www.info.bw/~much/lodge.htm">Muchenje Safari
Lodge</a> at Kasane on the Chobe has its own web-site.</p>

<hr>
<p class="backto"><a name="links_general" href="#contents">Back to
contents</a></p>

<h2>TOURISM LINKS - GENERAL BOTSWANA</h2>

<p>(<a href="#see-also">See other pages on this site</a>...)</p>

<p>Botswana's Hotels Association and Department of Tourism
contribute forwards to the <a href=
"http://africantravel.com/stbrob.html">Botswana Focus</a> site,
which includes maps of Gaborone, Gaborone district, and Tuli Block,
as well as the Kalahari, Okavango, and Chobe. For tourist lodges
and smaller hotels with good food and local connections see the
listing of Commercial Sites under <a href=
"http://www.info.bw/resource/local/index.shtml">Info.BW Local
Resources</a>.</p>

<p>Lonely Planet's web-site has two pages on Botswana, with a much
broader focus than just Okavango and Chobe. Its <a href=
"http://www.lonelyplanet.com/dest/afr/bot.htm">Destination
Botswana</a> has well-intentioned notes on environment, history
(for comments see <a href="http://humanities.ub.bw/history/bhp2.htm">
Botswana History Page 2</a> ), economy, culture (a little confused
about traditional religion), public holidays, current accomodation
and restautant costs, etc. It even covers Gaborone ('Los Angeles
without the glitz...no budget options') and can this really be
Serowe ('a few decent hotels')? Mention of Gcwihaba caves etc.
implies the traveller has independent access to a rough country
vehicle. Lonely Planet also has a useful <a href=
"http://www.lonelyplanet.com/letters/afr/bot_pc.htm">Travellers'
Reports on Botswana</a> page contributed by adventurous travellers
from recent experiences.</p>

<p><a href=
"http://www-sul.stanford.edu/depts/ssrg/africa/bots.html">Karen
Fung's Botswana Guide</a> includes tourism links under
"Travel".</p>

<p>For Gaborone try the <a href=
"http://www.places.co.za/html/kweneng.html">Digital Travel Agent
Guide to Gaborone</a> and <a href=
"http://encarta.msn.com/index/conciseindex/0F/00FD1000.htm">Encarta
on Gaborone</a>.</p>

<p>The Norwegian Council for Africa'a <a href=
"http://www.africaindex.africainfo.no/africaindex1/countries/botswana.html">
Botswana page</a> has a substantial list of links on Botswana,
including Tourism - concluding with a site boasting five
photographs in and around <a href=
"http://science.gmu.edu/~bwallet/places/gab/gab_pics.html">Gaborone
railway station</a>, masquerading as 'Pictures of GabArone'
(misspelt).</p>

<p>A German web-site, with a very useful list of links in English
and German, is <a href=
"http://www.kulturgeo.uni-freiburg.de/bots/botswana.html">
Forschungsprojekte Botswana</a> constructed by F.Kruger and making
reference to the German Friends of Botswana Society.</p>

<p>See the US State Dept's <a href=
"http://travel.state.gov/botswana.html">Botswana - Consular
Information Sheet</a>.</p>

<p>For something really different try <a href=
"http://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/harrisb/homepage.htm">
Botswana Bike and Build</a>. It is the detailed story of 40 <b>
Habitat for Humanity</b> cyclists from the US who in 1996 biked
from Gaborone to Kasane and built housing at Francistown, before
going on to do likewise in Tanzania and Malawi. Staying with
village and township people on the way, a good time was had by all,
with plenty of friendship and food.</p>

<p><a href="http://city.net/countries/botswana/">Excite Travel
Destinations' Botswana</a>, aimed at the U.S. and run by the Excite
search-engine, lists a few links, including a universal "English
for Travellers" site which makes no reference to Botswana at
all.</p>

<p>The <a href="http://www.interknowledge.com/botswana/bot02.htm">
Interknowledge Botswana Page</a> is brief.</p>

<p>For details of the numerous publications of the Botswana Society
see their <a href="../books/bspub.htm">publications page</a>.</p>

<h2>BIBLIOGRAPHY</h2>>

<p>(14a) Michael Main, <i>Kalahari: Life's Variety in Dune and
Delta</i> (Johannesburg: Southern Books, 1987) ISBN 1 86812 001
5</p>

<p>(14b) Karen Ross, <i>Jewel of the Kalahari: Okavango</i>
(London: BBC Books, 1987)</p>

<hr>
<a name="doc_end" href="#doc_top">Back to top</a> 

<p><small>Copyright &copy; 1999 Neil Parsons</small></p>

<p><small>The <b>Botswana History Pages</b> by Neil Parsons may be
freely reproduced, in print or electronically, on condition<br>
(i) that full acknowledgement of the source is made.<br>
(ii) that the use is not for profit</small></p>

<p><small>Last updated 19 August 1999</small></p>
</body>
</html>

 contentType 9 text/html url 40 http://www.thuto.org:80/ubh/bw/bhp14.htm responseCode 3 200 