oolacqkghqhsgaaonoucaqeaiiqewkmmokeghkjq length 4 8961 page 8961 <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
  
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">

<head>

<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=ISO-8859-1" />

<title> Neuroscience For Kids - Migraine vs Headache </title>

<link rel="start" title="return to home page" 
href="http://faculty.washington.edu/chudler/neurok.html" />

<meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />

<meta name="keywords" content="neuroscience,brain,nervous 
system,spinal_cord,k-12,school,drugs,LSD,alcohol,medicine,life 
science,glia,sleep,pain,children,development,neurology,kids,worksheets,language,laughter,music,neurobiology,cognition,perception,sensation,hands-on,activities,experiments,biology,elementary,creative_writing,projects,demonstrations,nerve,cocaine,awareness_week,science_fair,nicotine,learning,memory, 
education,student,secondary,migraine,chronic traumatic encephalopathy" />

<meta name="description" content="Intended for elementary and secondary 
school students and teachers who are interested in learning about the 
nervous system and brain with hands on activities, experiments and 
information." />
  
<style type="text/css" media="screen, projection"> @import "c/deB.css"; 
</style>

<!--[if IE 6]> <style type="text/css" media="screen"> @import 
"c/ie6.css"; </style> <![endif]-->

<!--[if IE 5]> <style type="text/css" media="screen"> @import 
"c/ie5.css"; </style> <![endif]-->

<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="c/pr.css" media="print" /> 
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="c/au.css" media="aural" />

</head> <body id="baw">

<p class="cr"> you are here: <a href="neurok.html">home</a> &#62; 
<strong>migraine vs headache</strong> </p>

<div id="ctr"> <div id="hd"> <h1> Neuroscience For Kids </h1> </div>

<div id="mn"> <h2>Migraine vs Headache </h2>

<p><strong>By Kate DiNucci, Neuroscience for Kids Guest Writer<br />
June 29, 2023</strong></p>

<p>
<img src="gif/migraine1.jpg" alt="headache" class="flr" /> 

Have you ever had a terrible pain in your brain that just can't seem 
to go away? Headaches are one of the most common causes of pain, with a 
whopping 96% of the population having experienced a headache in their 
lifetime. But only 10% of the population report having had a migraine.
</p>

<h3>What is the difference between a headache and a migraine?</h3>

<h4>Headache</h4>
<ul>

<li>Pain occurring anywhere in the head; pain can be localized or over a 
large area</li>

<li>Pain can manifest in a variety of ways from acute to dull, and 
come on quickly or slowly</li>

<li>Symptoms can be very brief, lasting an hour, or prolonged, lasting 
several days</li>
</ul>

<h4>Migraine</h4>

<ul>

<li>Severe localized headache; generally an intense 
radiating pain </li>

<li>Symptoms may include nausea, vomiting, and sensitivity to sensory 
input such as light, sound, touch or smell </li>

<li>Can last for hours to days and the pain can be so severe that it 
interferes with daily activities</li>

<li>Can sometimes be preceded by an "aura."  An aura is a change in 
vision or altered sensation including numbness or tingling, or 
difficulty with speech</li>

</ul>

<h3>What is happening in the brain when a headache or migraine 
occurs?</h3>
<img src="gif/migraine2.jpg" alt="headache" class="fl" /> 

<p>Even though it may feel as though the pain is coming from the very 
tissue of your brain, the brain actually has no pain receptors! While 
there are other cells in your head that have pain receptors, such as 
those near blood vessels, the primary cause for headaches is not usually 
occurring in the brain at all. Generally, headaches are caused by 
enlarged blood vessels, muscle tension, or stress. When this happens, 
the nerves surrounding blood vessels send signals to the brain to 
communicate the problem and the brain produces a pain response.</p>

<p>The exact cause of migraines is still being researched but current 
theories suggest that fluctuating levels of neurotransmitters, such as 
serotonin or estrogen, may play a role. Serotonin and estrogen are 
involved with intercellular communication but research suggests they can 
also cause blood vessels to constrict and dilate. Changes in brain 
activity and cell communication can alter neurotransmitter levels that 
causese blood vessels to constrict.  This change in the size of blood 
vessels could cause or contribute to migraine pain.</p>

<h3>Should I be concerned if I have a headache or migraine?</h3>
<img src="gif/migraine3.jpg" alt="headache" class="flr" /> 

<p>A headache that is not a symptom of a deeper underlying problem is 
referred to as a primary Headache; a secondary headache indicates an 
underlying problem or condition. It is estimated that 18% of all 
headaches are secondary headaches. A secondary headache could be caused 
by dehydration or improper medication usage. One type of secondary 
headache called a thunderclap headache can be particularly concerning. A 
thunderclap headache comes on suddenly and is extremely painful, and it 
can be a sign of a brain injury. The majority of headaches will go away 
with time or at-home remedies.</p>

<p>Migraines generally are not indicative of an underlying problem, but 
they can interfere with daily life.  Migraine treatments that can 
improve the quality of life include taking preventative medications or a 
rescue medication that is taken during an active migraine attack to 
lessen the symptoms.</p>

<p>Ultimately, headaches and migraines are common and generally not 
something to be overly concerned about. Repeating headaches or migraines 
can be related to high levels of stress or other lifestyle choices, so 
it is important to be mindful of how our behavior affects our bodies.</p>

<p>References:</h3>
<ul>

<li><a 
href="https://www.mayoclinic.org/symptoms/headache/basics/definition/sym-20050800">Headache 
- Mayo Clinic</a></li>

<li><a 
href="https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/migraine-headache/symptoms-causes/syc-20360201">Migraine 
- Mayo Clinic</a></li>

<li><a href=" 
https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/9639-headaches">Headaches 
- Cleveland Clinic</a></li>

<li><a href=" 
https://www.ohsu.edu/brain-institute/understanding-headaches-and-migraines">Understanding 
Headaches and Migraines</a></li>

<li><a 
href="https://newsinhealth.nih.gov/2014/03/headache-pain">Headache 
Pain</a></li>

<li><a href=" 
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/headache/how-a-migraine-happens">How 
a Migraine Happens</a></li>

<li><a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6340385/">Red 
and orange flags for secondary headaches in clinical practice</a></li> 
</ul>

<p class="ftr"> Copyright &#169; 1996-2023, Eric H. Chudler All Rights 
Reserved.</p>

 </div> </div>

<div id="nav"><p> <a href="neurok.html" title="return to home page" 
accesskey="1"> home</a> <em>|</em> <a href="index1.html" title="Search 
the Neuroscience for Kids Web Site" accesskey="4">search</a> <em>|</em> 
<a href="introb.html" title="the nervous system, the brain, spinal cord, 
neurons, senses" accesskey="x">explore</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="experi.html" title="lesson plans, demonstrations and games to help 
you learn about the nervous system" accesskey="p">experiment</a> 
<em>|</em> <a href="questions.html" title="do you have a question about 
the nervous system?" accesskey="q"> questions / answers</a> <em>|</em> 
<a href="mailto:chudler@u.washington.edu" title="please send comments 
and suggestions to Dr. Chudler"> contact</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="links.html" title="other places on the Internet to find out more 
about the nervous system" accesskey="l"> links</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="help.html" title="Neuroscience for Kids needs your help" 
accesskey="5"> donate</a> </p>

&#160;

<p> <a href="newslet.html" title="sign up to receive the neuroscience for 
kids newsletter" accesskey="9"> newsletter</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="baw.html" title="see what brain awareness week is all about" 
accesskey="a"> brain awareness week</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="inthenews.html" title="Current events and new discoveries in brain 
research" accesskey="n"> Neuroscience in the News</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="contest23.html" title="kids poetry writing contest" accesskey="o"> 
drawing contest</a> <em>|</em> <a href="books.html" title="on-line and 
off-line books and articles" accesskey="b"> books and articles</a> 
<em>|</em> <a href="jpuz.html" title="Free Electronic Neuroscience 
Postcards" accesskey="c"> postcards</a> <em>|</em> <a href="whowe.html" 
title="the people behind neuroscience for kids" accesskey="2"> about</a> 
<em>|</em> <a href="privacy.html" title="privacy statement" accesskey="6"> 
privacy</a> <em>|</em> <a href="disclaim.html" title="disclaimer notice" 
accesskey="7"> disclaimer</a> <em>|</em> <a href="map.html" title="site 
map" accesskey="3"> site map </a> </p> </div>

</body> </html>
 contentType 9 text/html url 54 http://faculty.washington.edu:80/chudler/migraine.html responseCode 3 200 