wezcfslixammpchoqgamxgbqgczcfkemtcnoucjm length 4 9004 page 9004 <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
  
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">

<head>

<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=ISO-8859-1" />

<title> Neuroscience For Kids - Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy </title>

<link rel="start" title="return to home page" 
href="http://faculty.washington.edu/chudler/neurok.html" />

<meta http-equiv="Content-Style-Type" content="text/css" />

<meta name="keywords" content="neuroscience,brain,nervous 
system,spinal_cord,k-12,school,drugs,LSD,alcohol,medicine,life 
science,glia,sleep,pain,children,development,neurology,kids,worksheets,language,laughter,music,neurobiology,cognition,perception,sensation,hands-on,activities,experiments,biology,elementary,creative_writing,projects,demonstrations,nerve,cocaine,awareness_week,science_fair,nicotine,learning,memory, 
education,student,secondary,chronic traumatic encephalopathy" />

<meta name="description" content="Intended for elementary and secondary 
school students and teachers who are interested in learning about the 
nervous system and brain with hands on activities, experiments and 
information." />
  
<style type="text/css" media="screen, projection"> @import "c/deB.css"; 
</style>

<!--[if IE 6]> <style type="text/css" media="screen"> @import 
"c/ie6.css"; </style> <![endif]-->

<!--[if IE 5]> <style type="text/css" media="screen"> @import 
"c/ie5.css"; </style> <![endif]-->

<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="c/pr.css" media="print" /> 
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="c/au.css" media="aural" />

</head> <body id="baw">

<p class="cr"> you are here: <a href="neurok.html">home</a> &#62; 
<strong>chronic traumatic encephalopathy</strong> </p>

<div id="ctr"> <div id="hd"> <h1> Neuroscience For Kids </h1> </div>

<div id="mn"> <h2> Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy </h2>

<p><strong>By Kate DiNucci, Neuroscience for Kids Guest Writer<br />
April 3, 2023</strong></p>
<img src="gif/cte1a.jpg" alt="football" width="333" height="286" 
class="flr" /> 

<p> 
In 1928, Dr. Harrison Martland noticed the abnormal 
symptoms and behaviors of boxers after they received many hits to the 
head, calling it "punch-drunk syndrome." In 1949, Dr. Macdonald 
Critchley noticed a similar pattern in boxers and called it "chronic 
traumatic encephalopathy" (CTE). When Dr. Bennet Omalu did the autopsy 
of Pittsburgh Steelers football star Mike Webster and published his 
findings about CTE in 2005, CTE became a widely discussed topic. The 
neurological condition of CTE became even more popularized after the 
release of the film <i>Concussion</i> starring Will Smith in 2015, 
retelling the story of Dr. Omalu's discovery. </p>

<h3>What is CTE?</h3>

<p><img src="gif/cte1tau.jpg" alt="tau" class="flr" />
 Chronic traumatic encephalopathy is the degeneration of brain tissue 
caused by extensive, repeated head trauma. Evidence suggests the brains 
of patients with CTE display an excessive buildup of the naturally 
occurring protein, Tau (see chemical structure in figure below). Tau has also been linked to other 
neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's disease; however, Tau 
appears in a distinct pattern in CTE. Researchers are unsure why excess 
Tau is produced in people with CTE, however, the build-up of the protein 
causes areas of the brain to atrophy, meaning that brain cells die and 
affected areas of the brain lose function. </p>

<h3>What are Symptoms of CTE?</h3>

<p>Chronic traumatic encephalopathy causes a wide range of symptoms 
depending on the age at which they present. Symptoms of CTE commonly 
appear later in life, many decades after the head trauma. This form of 
chronic traumatic encephalopathy often develops symptoms around the age 
of 60 and is usually associated with cognitive impairment with memory 
loss and difficulty with organization and planning. Sometimes symptoms 
of CTE appear earlier in life, in the late 20s and early 30s, which 
usually manifests as emotional instability, depression, or anxiety. 
Other symptoms of CTE include problems sleeping, substance abuse, and 
movement problems such as tremors or muscle weakness.
</p>

<h3>Who gets CTE?</h3>

<p>
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy has been seen most commonly in American 
football players, however, anyone who has prolonged and repetitive 
exposure to head trauma can be affected. This can include boxers, ice 
hockey players, or military personnel who have been exposed to explosive 
blasts. CTE does not stem from a handful of concussions but rather 
hundreds or thousands of head traumas. In most cases, it is common for 
patients to have experienced second impact syndrome. Second impact 
syndrome is when another head injury is sustained before a prior head 
injury has fully healed.
</p>
<img src="gif/cte1b.jpg" alt="head injury" width="333" height="299" class="flr" />

<h3>How is CTE diagnosed?</h3>

<p>For now, chronic traumatic encephalopathy can only be diagnosed by 
autopsy. Though it is not routine to test for CTE in autopsies, when it 
is done, pathologists use special chemicals that make the Tau protein 
visible and look for a particular pattern unique to CTE.</p>

<h3>How is CTE Treated?</h3>

<p>Currently, there is no cure for chronic traumatic encephalopathy, but 
there are ways to treat its common symptoms. For example, physiotherapy 
can be beneficial for people with movement problems, and speech and 
language therapy can be used for people with speech and memory problems.</p>

<h3>How can CTE be Prevented?</h3>

<p>Chronic traumatic encephalopathy can be prevented by reducing 
exposure to head trauma, such as minimizing involvement in contact 
sports and preventing additional injury after a concussion. It is also 
essential to wear proper protective equipment when playing contact 
sports and to receive proper treatment immediately after a head injury 
occurs.</p>

<p>References:</h3>
<ul>

<li><a 
href="https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/chronic-traumatic-encephalopathy/sym 
ptoms-causes/syc-20370921">Chronic traumatic encephalopathy - Mayo 
Clinic</a></li>

<li><a 
href="https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/chronic-traumatic-encephalopathy/">Chronic 
traumatic encephalopathy - NHS</a></li>

<li><a 
href="https://concussionfoundation.org/CTE-resources/what-is-CTE">What 
is CTE - Concussion Legacy Foundation</a></li>

<li><a 
href="https://memory.ucsf.edu/dementia/chronic-traumatic-encephalopathy">Chronic 
Traumatic Encephalopathy - Weill Institute for Neurosciences</a></li>

<li><a 
href="https://www.headstrongconcussion.com/history-of-cte">History of 
CTE - Headstrong</a></li>

</ul>

<p class="ftr"> Copyright &#169; 1996-2023, Eric H. Chudler All Rights 
Reserved.</p> 
 </div> </div>

<div id="nav"><p> <a href="neurok.html" title="return to home page" 
accesskey="1"> home</a> <em>|</em> <a href="index1.html" title="Search 
the Neuroscience for Kids Web Site" accesskey="4">search</a> <em>|</em> 
<a href="introb.html" title="the nervous system, the brain, spinal cord, 
neurons, senses" accesskey="x">explore</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="experi.html" title="lesson plans, demonstrations and games to help 
you learn about the nervous system" accesskey="p">experiment</a> 
<em>|</em> <a href="questions.html" title="do you have a question about 
the nervous system?" accesskey="q"> questions / answers</a> <em>|</em> 
<a href="mailto:chudler@u.washington.edu" title="please send comments 
and suggestions to Dr. Chudler"> contact</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="links.html" title="other places on the Internet to find out more 
about the nervous system" accesskey="l"> links</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="help.html" title="Neuroscience for Kids needs your help" 
accesskey="5"> donate</a> </p>

&#160;

<p> <a href="newslet.html" title="sign up to receive the neuroscience for 
kids newsletter" accesskey="9"> newsletter</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="baw.html" title="see what brain awareness week is all about" 
accesskey="a"> brain awareness week</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="inthenews.html" title="Current events and new discoveries in brain 
research" accesskey="n"> Neuroscience in the News</a> <em>|</em> <a 
href="contest23.html" title="kids poetry writing contest" accesskey="o"> 
drawing contest</a> <em>|</em> <a href="books.html" title="on-line and 
off-line books and articles" accesskey="b"> books and articles</a> 
<em>|</em> <a href="jpuz.html" title="Free Electronic Neuroscience 
Postcards" accesskey="c"> postcards</a> <em>|</em> <a href="whowe.html" 
title="the people behind neuroscience for kids" accesskey="2"> about</a> 
<em>|</em> <a href="privacy.html" title="privacy statement" accesskey="6"> 
privacy</a> <em>|</em> <a href="disclaim.html" title="disclaimer notice" 
accesskey="7"> disclaimer</a> <em>|</em> <a href="map.html" title="site 
map" accesskey="3"> site map </a> </p> </div>

<p> <img src="gif/neuron2.gif" width="95" height="480" alt="" class="ex" 
/> </p>

</body> </html>
 contentType 9 text/html url 49 http://faculty.washington.edu:80/chudler/cte.html responseCode 3 200 