widitehsaqjkfiekyicebefkuomgmcqkjawkiirm length 5 23993 page 23993 <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.0 Transitional//EN"
 "http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-html40/loose.dtd">
<html>
<head>
<title>Botswana History Page 13: Society</title>
<meta name="description" content="Botswana history: Society">
<meta name="keywords" content="Botswana society, Africa, Bechuanaland Protectorate, social class, ethinicity, gender, villages, Neil Parsons, Q. N. Parsons, Southern Africa, University of Botswana History Department">
<style type="text/css">
<!--
P.backto
   {
   background-color: #F5FFFA;
   border: double thin #0000FF;
   padding: 6px;
   width: 35%;
   text-align: center;
   font-size: smaller;
   }
h2, h3, h4
   {
   background-color: #CCFFFF;
   padding: 12px;
   }
h2
   {
   width: 80%;
   }
h3
   {
   width: 60%;
   }
h4
   {
   width: 45%;
   }
-->
</style>


</head>
<body bgcolor="#FFFFF0" text="#000000">
<div align="center">
<table width="100%" summary="Layout table for heading: Society">
<tr>
<td width="100%" height="30" bgcolor="#00CCFF">
<center><big>Botswana History Pages, by Neil Parsons</big></center>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td width="100%" height="5" bgcolor="#FFFFFF"></td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td width="100%" height="50" bgcolor="#000000">
<center>
<h1><font color="#FFFFFF">13: &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Society</font></h1>
</center>
</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td width="100%" height="5" bgcolor="#FFFFFF"></td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td width="100%" height="30" bgcolor="#00CCFF">&nbsp;</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>

<center><a href="bhpindex.htm">To Index</a> &nbsp;|&nbsp; <a name=
"doc_top" href="#doc_end">To end of page</a> &nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href=
"../index.html">Back to History Home Page</a></center>

<center>
<p><font size="2"><a href="bhp1.htm">1: Brief History of
Botswana</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp2.htm">2: Comments and
Links</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp3.htm">
3:Archaeology</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp4.htm">4:
Culture</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp5.htm">5:
Economy</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp6.htm">6:
Education</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp7.htm">7:
Geography</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp;<br>
<a href="bhp8.htm">8: Language</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp9.htm">
9: Literature</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp10.htm">
10:Politics</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp11.htm">11:
Religion</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp12.htm">12:
Science</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp13.htm">13:
Society</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp14.htm">14:
Tourism</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp; <a href="bhp15.htm">15:
Media</a>&nbsp;|&nbsp;</font></p>
</center>

<hr>
<a name="contents" href="#contents"><b>Contents</b></a> 

<ul>
<li><a href="#demography">Demography</a></li>

<li><a href="#social_class">Social class</a></li>

<li><a href="#gender">Gender</a></li>

<li><a href="#ethnicity">Ethnicity</a></li>

<li><a href="#daily_life">Daily Life in Villages</a></li>

<li><a href="#health">Health</a></li>

<li><a href="#society_links">Society Links</a></li>
</ul>

<hr>
<p>Notes and Comments</p>

<p>Provisional version by Neil Parsons April 1999</p>

<hr>
<p class="backto"><a name="demography" href="#contents">Back to contents</a></p>

<h2>DEMOGRAPHY</h2>

<p>After six previous censuses of variable quality, Botswana had
its first systematic national census in 1964. Total population was
estimated at 550,000, with 35,000 absentees - mostly adult male
workers in South Africa. Since 1964, the population has grown at
about 3.4 per cent a year, thus exceeding one million soon after
1980 and doubling every twenty years.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the rate of labour migration abroad has been reduced
by a combination of restrictions by South Africa and increased
employment opportunities at home. Botswana also provided a home and
eventual citizenship for numbers of refugees between the 1950s and
the 1970s - from Angola, Zimbabwe, South Africa, and most recently
Namibia.</p>

<p>The 1991 census showed improved life expectancy of 67.0 years at
birth, up from the 1981 figures by eight years to 68.4 years for
females and by ten years to 64.8 years for males, due to the
falling death rate. However these figures were drastically revised
downwards in 1998 to take into accounts projected deaths from the
AIDS pandemic.</p>

<p>The 1991 census also showed that Botswana is one of the southern
African countries experiencing a falling birth rate in response to
improved infant life expectancy.</p>

<p>The age and gender composition of the population was weighted by
an increasingly youthful population. Approximately one fifth was
under 5, and nearly half younger than 15. Females exceeded males in
age groups over 15; below that age the gender ratio was more or
less equal - because of recently reduced male infant mortality.</p>

<p>The American CIA's <i>World Factbook 1998</i> lists life
expectancy in Botswana at 40.09 years, with no note on the drastic
reduction on previous statistics because of 1998 HIV/AIDS mortality
projections.</p>

<p>The estimated total population (1997) is 1.53 million. The 1991
census showed that half the population is urban. One quarter of the
population lives in six 'modern' towns and cities (Gaborone 1997
est. 183 000, Francistown 88 000, Selebi-Phikwe 46 000, Lobatse 30
000, Jwaneng 15 000, Orapa 10 000), and one quarter in twenty
'traditional towns and large villages (Molepolole 1997 est. 43 000,
Kanye 35 000, Serowe 32 000, Mahalapye 31 000, Maun 29 000,
etc.).</p>

<p>See <a href="http://168.167.13.200/newpage1.htm">UB Demography
Department</a>, and the internationally recognised <a href=
"http://168.167.13.200/newpage8.htm">Population and Sustainable
Development training programme</a> at the University of Botswana -
previously based at the Institute of Social Studies at the Hague,
Netherlands.</p>

<hr>
<p class="backto"><a name="social_class" href="#contents">Back to contents</a></p>

<h2>SOCIAL CLASS</h2>

<p>As everywhere in the world, social classes in Botswana are fluid
without definite boundaries. Class identities can change subtly
within a couple of decades and dramatically over generations.
Families and individuals are also stretched between "traditional"
and "modern" models, between changing popular acceptance of
feudal-type and capitalist-type social status.</p>

<p>The "traditional" model of social hierarchy in a Tswana state
was of the Kgosi (paramount chief) and his ruling clan relatives
seen as aristocrats, other (often non-Tswana) clans with
cattle-holding headmen seen as commoners, and families without
their own clan headman seen as servants or serfs (semi-slaves).
Rich and poor were basically distinguished in people's eyes by
ownership and holding of cattle.</p>

<p>The "traditional" class structure was compressed during the
colonial period, notably between about 1910 and about 1950 when
drought and depression drastically reduced the value of cattle. The
typical colonial class structure has been described as a
"peasantariat", an insecure worker-peasanthood that served the
interests of the very big mining capitalists in South Africa.</p>

<p>Impoverished aristocrats were forced to work in the mines of
South Africa, and some serfs returned from the mines with
sufficient property to gain the status of commoners. But the
greatest changes were to emerge among families blessed with more
productive agriculturalists and craftworkers. They invested their
modest gains in the modest expenditure of sending children,
particularly girls, off to school.</p>

<p>The result was a small educated elite, of commoner as well as
aristocrat and headman roots, that benefited when prosperity began
to return in the later 1960s and particularly in the early 1970s.
This new &eacute;lite supplied a bureaucracy who were share-holders
in the growth of the new Republic of Botswana. During the 1970s
they invested their gains in cattle and petty commerce, and
thereafter invested in landed property and larger enterprises. In
Botswana, if rarely elsewhere in Africa, the "bureaucratic
bourgoisie" has led to something like a "national bourgeoisie".</p>

<hr>
<p class="backto"><a name="gender" href="#contents">Back to contents</a></p>

<h2>GENDER</h2>

<p>Gender relations should be seen in the context of changing class
relations. The "traditional" expendibility of young men as soldiers
in war (with high status given to survivors), for example, was
converted to expendibility as migrant workers in the mines in the
colonial period.</p>

<p>Royal and aristocratic women were always at an advantage over
commoner and servile women. They also benefited from the first,
Christian wave of Westernization of "traditional" law around 1900,
in the recognition of their property and succession rights. A child
was no longer, as in most "feudal" societies, the automatic
"property" of the father.</p>

<p>Gender relations among commoners were changed dramatically by
the prevalence of male labour out-migration in the 1930s-50s.
Formal marriage (by marriage payments between families) and female
monogamy declined, and women often became de facto heads of
household. The gains of royal and aristocratic women in Tswana
"traditional" law were extended to commoner women.</p>

<p>Botswana shares with Lesotho, and the parts of South Africa
between them, the unusual feature for Africa over the past century
of more girls than boys going to school. (More girls in elementary
classes, but more boys post-elementary.) This is no doubt a major
cause of rising feminine consciousness, which was both cause and
effect of the reforms in Tswana law. In the biggest "tribal" state,
the Ngwato, women standing up for their interests as women can be
seen among women aristocrats from around 1900 and among women
commoners from around 1950.</p>

<p>Some observers have suggested a jealous male backlash against
the widespread education of women, seen in increasing accusations
of witchcraft against women during the 20th century - the
feminization of evil. But this hypothesis needs to be tested
against historical records.</p>

<p>Botswana today has women cabinet ministers and a woman high
court judge. But ironically women are worse off than men in the
"modern" sector than in the "traditional" sector. Households headed
by women have half the average income in "modern" towns, and
two-thirds the average income in "traditional" towns and large
villages, but have an equal share of poverty (less than a quarter
of the "modern" town income level) with households headed by men in
rural areas.</p>

<p>For female aspects of gender see <a href=
"http://www.sn.apc.org/sangonet/SAIE/saie19/botmet.html">
Metlhaetsile Women's Information Centre</a> (MWIC).</p>

<hr>
<p class="backto"><a name="ethnicity" href="#contents">Back to contents</a></p>

<h2>ETHNICITY</h2>

<p>The dominant ethnic identity in Botswana is Tswana, with its
whole population being characterized as Batswana (singular,
Motswana) whatever their original ethnic origin. Though no attempt
to count population by ethnic origin has been made since 1946,
probably less than half the population is "ethnic Tswana" by
origin. (There being a greater number of "ethnic Tswana" in South
Africa, where a Tswana autonomous region called Bophuthatswana,
also referring to its population as "Batswana", existed between
1976 and 1994.)</p>

<p>Tswana ethnic dominance in Botswana can be dated to the eight
Tswana states which ruled most of the area in the 19th century. The
populations of these states were given the official colonial status
of "tribes", a term still used officially today, under British
colonial rule. (See <a href="bhp1.htm">Page 1: Brief
History)</a>.</p>

<p>Most Botswana nationals today still acknowledge membership of
one of these eight "tribal" state identities - Tawana (Batawana) in
the north-west, Ngwato (Bangwato, Bamangwato or Bagamangwato) in
east- central areas, Kwena (Bakwena) and Ngwaketse (Bangwaketse),
Kgatla (Bakgatla) and Tlokwa (Batlokwa), Malete (Balete or
Bamalete) and Rolong (Barolong) in the south-east. The dominant
group within each traditional state was Tswana. Except among the
Tawana of Ngamiland, most non-Tswana groups were left in their own
wards with their own chiefs subordinate to the Tswana rulers.</p>

<p>Within south-east Botswana the other main ethnic identity, that
of the Khalagari (Bakhalagari), has become so incorporated within
Tswanadom as to be now almost indistinguishable. Khalagari (who
could be referred to as 'Western Sotho') people and their language,
anyway closely related to Tswana ('Central Sotho'), have become so
acculturated that even their name is now usually rendered in the
Tswana form as Kgalagadi - and this remains the official Tswana
term for the 'desert' named for the people, still called Kalahari
in English.</p>

<p>The Ngwato of east-central Botswana constitute in numbers and
territory the largest traditional "tribal" state, but are probably
by origin less than one fifth ethnically "pure" Tswana. Besides
those of Khalagari origin, the other major ethnicities are Tswapong
(Batswapong), Birwa (Babirwa) and Kalanga (Bakalanga). The Tswapong
and Birwa living on the edges of the Limpopo valley are related in
kinship and language to the Pedi ("Northern Sotho") peoples across
the river in South Africa.</p>

<p>The Kalanga living in the north of the Central District, and
those around Francistown, are related to the Kalanga and other
Shona peoples of Zimbabwe. Many Kalanga have hung onto their own
"tribal" identity while adopting Setswana culture and becoming
fully integrated into Botswana national society.</p>

<p>The Tawana state of north-west Botswana can be seen as having
had the least successful "tribal" identity, with most of its
subjects only coming to see themselves as Tswana in the second half
of the 20th century. A very small ethnic Tswana group ruled over a
large majority of Yeyi (Bayeyi) [sometimes written "Yei"] and
Mbukushu (Hambukushu), who were given only servile status under
Tswana headmen, rather than as free citizens in their own wards
with their chiefs recognised by the Tawana rulers as headmen. Only
the Mbanderu (Ovambanderu) and Herero (Ovaherero), with close
relatives across the border in Namibia, and other Tswana minority
groups were given such citizen status. See <a href=
"http://mindspring.com/~johnbock/bnr.html">article by John
Bock</a>.</p>

<p>The Subiya (Basubiya) along the Chobe, with close relatives in
the Caprivi Strip (Namibia) and Zambia, nevertheless retained their
'tribal' identity by being excluded from the Tawana "tribal"
reserve by the British.</p>

<p>Small and scattered groups of Khoesan people inhabit the south-
western districts of Botswana, as well as being found semi-
incorporated with other ethnic groups elsewhere. These Khoesan
(otherwise Basarwa,'Bushmen', etc.), speak languages characterised
as Khoe (or Khwe) and San. They include some communities with their
own headmen, and poorer groups without recognised headmen employed
by Tswana and white or Herero settler cattle-farmers - or
attempting to hunt and gather in game areas. See <a href=
"http://kalaharipeoples.org/">Kalahari Peoples Fund</a> web-site;
alsothe University of Cologne project on <a href=
"http://www.uni-koeln.de/phil-fak/afrikanistik/sfb389/c5-section.html">
Hunter-gatherers in transition</a>.</p>

<p>Khoesan communities with their own headmen include now Tswana-
speaking or Kalanga-speaking Khoesan cattle-farmers on the Nata and
Boteti Rivers in the north, and Afrikaans-speaking Khoesan cattle-
farmers on the Molopo River in the south (related to Orlam-Nama
people in South Africa and Namibia).</p>

<p>White settlement in Botswana, consisting of Afrikaners and fewer
English settled in border farms, totalled less than 3000 people in
the colonial period. Since then a larger "expatriate" population
from Europe, North America, South Asia and elsewhere in Africa
(n.b. Zambia and Ghana) has been drawn to the main towns to service
Botswana's remarkable post-colonial development.</p>

<p>Though the cultural-linguistic demands of educated Kalanga and
others continue, Botswana has not experienced significant ethnic
friction since independence. There has been the growth of a new
middle class and new working class, largely resident in the modern
towns, bi-lingual in Setswana and English and expressing clear
national identity over "tribal" identity.</p>

<p>The American CIA World Factbook 1998's Botswana page's note on
Ethnicity is: "Batswana 95%, Kalanga, Basarwa, and Kgalagadi 4%,
white 1%." This is obviously based on a confusion over the term
'Batswana' which is officially used refer to all citizens of
Botswana, and thus to all speakers of Setswana as their national
language. In fact the only full ethnic national census was in 1936,
and the last racial national census was in 1964. See Ethnologue's
"Languages of the World" 13th edition (Dallas Texas, 1996) <a href=
"http://www.sil.org/ethnologue/countries/Bots.html">Languages of
Botswana</a> for more recent, unexplained statistics of numbers of
language speakers.</p>

<hr>
<p class="backto"><a name="daily_life" href="#contents">Back to contents</a></p>

<h2>DAILY LIFE IN VILLAGES</h2>

<p>Western dress has been common among people in Botswana, except
at the poorest level, for more than a century. Traditional dress
having consisted of tailored leather and fur clothing, effective
against the winter cold, and sandals or soft leather shoes.</p>

<p>Common diet and cuisine consist of sorghum and maize porridge,
melons, seeds, wild plums, beans and pulses and traditional
spinach, supplemented by tomato and potato or onion and oranges
usually purchased from stores. Meat consumption, (traditionally
consisting of occasional wildlife or goat, and beef but rarely) has
become more common with the opening of small butcheries selling
beef. Beverages include forms of soured milk, sorghum or maize
beer, and bottled or canned soft drinks and lager beers.
Consumption of chemically preserved canned drinks has greatly
increased with the spread of cash income.</p>

<p>Families in rural villages live in traditional compounds,
usually with two or three small houses with cylindrical clay walls
and conical thatch roofs, set round an open fireplace and
surrounded by low clay walling. Most recently built houses are
square with metal roofs, while many houses in the north-west are
made of reed. Furniture and crockery are usually of Western type,
though traditional sleeping mats and large traditional pots (for
cooling liquids) also remain popular.</p>

<p>Most cooking in villages is on open wood fires, and lighting by
candle and paraffin (kerosene) lantern, though coal fires have
become general in poorer urban households without electricity.</p>

<hr>
<p class="backto"><a name="health" href="#contents">Back to contents</a></p>

<h2>HEALTH</h2>

<p>Botswana is blessed with a generally dry and warm climate
generally conducive to good health. The incidence of tropical
diseases, notably malaria and bilharzia and sleeping-sickness, is
limited by the environment and lack of surface water. Until the
HIV/AIDS epidemic, the most common fatal diseases are intestinal
(diarrhoeal and digestive diseases) and respiratory (pneumonia and
tuberculosis), resulting from poverty or ignorance of nutrition,
sanitation and housing. Measles and hepatitis are also fairly
common.</p>

<p>Apart from HIV/AIDS, the main threats to health, besides poverty
and ignorance, are diseases associated with changing lifestyle,
particularly diet. Salt intake associated with greater consumption
of red meat is resulting in increased incidence of high blood
pressure, fatal strokes and heart disease. Sugar intake associated
with soft drinks etc. is leading to more and more dental caries in
older children.</p>

<p>The spread of HIV/AIDS, initially along trucking routes and from
mining areas in the north, is closely associated with the incidence
of other (hetero-)sexually transmitted venereal diseases. See the
<a href="http://www.sn.apc.org/sangonet/SAIE/saie29/botact.html">
Botswana AIDS Action Trust</a></p>

<p>Since 1973 government health policy has been based on the
provision of basic health services, in the form of health posts in
every village with a population over 500, and clinics in every area
with more than 4000 people in a 15 kilometre radius. Every post was
first supplied with a centrally-trained but locally-selected family
welfare educator, and then by a professional nurse.</p>

<p>Since the later 1980s there has also been extensive investment
in two large national referral hospitals, at Gaborone and
Francistown. There are eight older government hospitals, three
Christian mission hospitals, four mining company hospitals, one
government psychiatric hospital, and a private clinic-hospital at
Gaborone. There are also schemes for the blind and handicapped
coordinated by the Red Cross and other voluntary bodies.</p>

<p>The use of government health services is for a small nominal
fee, There are private health insurance schemes covering
fee-charging private medical practitioners. There are up to 200
Western-certified physicians in private practice, and more than
2000 traditional herbalists, healers and diviners. See <a href=
"http://usa.healthnet.org">HealthNet Botswana</a> pages with
statistics produced by the Botswana <a href=
"http://www/gov.bw/ministry_of_health.html">Ministry of
Health</a>.</p>

<p>There is now a modest state pension scheme for people over 65
years old. See <a href=
"http://www/gov.bw/ministry_of_labour_and_home_affairs.html">
Ministry of Labour and Home Affairs</a>. See also <a href=
"http://www.sn.apc.org/sangonet/SAIE/saie29/botbcd.html">Botswana
Council for the Disabled</a> and <a href=
"http://www.sn.apc.org/sangonet/SAIE/saie29/botches.html">Cheshire
Mogoditshane Rehabilitation Centre</a>.</p>

<hr>
<p class="backto"><a name="society_links" href="#contents">Back to
contents</a></p>

<h2>SOCIETY LINKS</h2>

<p>Isaac Schapera is the doyen of social scientists who have worked
on Botswana. His field notes, dating from 1929, are deposited in
the London School of Economics' <a href=
"http://www.lse.ac.uk/blpes/archives/schap.htm">Schapera achive</a>
and in the Botswana National Archives.</p>

<p><a href=
"http://www.monash.edu.au/pubs/montage/Montage_96-08/p14.html">The
Adventures of George Silberbauer</a> is a somewhat patronizing
piece on an anthropologist among the Kalahari Khoesan in the
1950s.</p>

<p>For details of the numerous publications of the Botswana Society
see their <a href="../books/bspub.htm">publications page</a>.</p>

<hr>
<h2>BIBLIOGRAPHY</h2>

<p>(13a) Bessie Head, Serowe, <i>Village of the Rain Wind</i>
(London &amp; Portsmouth, New Hampshire: Heinemann, 1981)</p>

<p>(13b) Isaac Schapera, Adam Kuper &amp; John Comaroff, <i>The
Tswana</i> (London: International African Institute, 1976 edn.)
[bibliog.]</p>

<p>(13c) Laurens van der Post &amp; Jane Taylor, <i>Testament to
the Bushmen</i> (New York &amp; London: Viking Penguin, 1984) ISBN
-14-007579-8</p>

<p>(13d) Edwin N. Wilmsen, <i>Land Filled with Flies: a Political
Economy of the Kalahari</i> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1989) ISBN 0 226 90015 0</p>

<hr>
<a name="doc_end" href="#doc_top">Back to top</a> 

<p><small>Copyright &copy; 1999 Neil Parsons</small></p>

<p><small>The <b>Botswana History Pages</b> by Neil Parsons may be
freely reproduced, in print or electronically, on condition<br>
(i) that full acknowledgement of the source is made.<br>
(ii) that the use is not for profit</small></p>

<p><small>Last updated 19 August 1999</small></p>
</body>
</html>

 contentType 9 text/html url 40 http://www.thuto.org:80/ubh/bw/bhp13.htm responseCode 3 200 