xmfqscvivcmgiojgpcgqnaceskvccalewqeggaxe length 5 42123 page 42123 <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.0 Transitional//EN"
 "http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-html40/loose.dtd">
<html>
<head>

<title>Guidelines for students in HIS471 and HIS472 (research essay project)</title>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=US-ASCII">
<meta http-equiv="Content-Script-Type" content="text/javascript">
<meta name="description" content="Guidelines for students in the University of Botswana history research essay course, including format of references">
</head>
<body bgcolor="#FFFFF0" text="#000000">
<center padding="5px"><b>University of Botswana History Department</b></center>

<div align="CENTER">
<table width="100%" summary="Layout table for heading: H403 guidelines"
cellpadding="20" style="border: solid medium #3399ff">
<tr>
<td width="100%"   valign="middle" bgcolor="#000000">
<center><h1><font color="#ffffcc">Guidelines for HIS471/HIS472 students</font></h1></center>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
</div>

<center style="padding: 5px">
<font size="-1">
<a href="#contents">Contents</a>
&nbsp;||&nbsp;<a name="doc_top" href="#doc_end">To end of page</a> 
&nbsp;||&nbsp; <a href="../../../index.html">History Home Page</a>
&nbsp;||&nbsp; <a href="../../../h-index.htm">Site index</a>
</font>
</center>

<p>In the HIS471-HIS472 programme, History and Archaeology students
write a research essay as the result of a year's supervised primary
research. Details of these essays, which are deposited in the
University Library, are available on this site: <a href=
"../../../ac/studrp.htm">H403 essays and MA theses</a>.</p>

<p>The following guidelines were originally adopted by the 
History Department in the 1990s. At that time the research essay
project course was implemented as a year-long course "H403".
Since semesterization the project is technically implemented 
as two one-semester courses, HIS471 and HIS472, but is really
still a single project. The following guidelines are the
same as the old H403 guidelines except where the original
provisions have been superseded by semesterization.
(For comparison, see the 
<a href="../../h403g.htm">original H403 guidelines</a>.)</p>


<p><a name="contents" href="#contents"><b>Contents</b></a></p>
<ul>
<li><a href="#notes">General notes</a></li>
<li><a href="#format">Format of references</a></li>
<li><a href="#title_page">Format of title page</a></li>
<li><a href="#author-date">Notes on author-date style</a></li>
</ul>
<hr>
<p><a name="notes" href="#contents">Back to contents</a></p>

<center><h2>General notes</h2></center>

<p><u>Length</u>: Research essays must not be longer than 10,000
words. This is a <i>maximum</i>; essays may be shorter. The limit
applies to the main text; that is, footnotes, appendices,
bibliography etc. are not counted. Permission to exceed 10,000
words may be granted by the department in exceptional cases.</p>

<p><u>Ten-year rule</u>: HIS471-2 essays in history should not normally
deal with events less than ten years in the past. In setting a
ten-year limit, it is meant that the <i>main topic</i> should be at
least ten years ago; it is permissible to add more minor comments
on more recent events. The ten-year rule is a general limit rather
than an absolute ban, and may be set aside in special cases (such
as projects involving cultural resource management).</p>

<p><u>Marking</u>: HIS471-2 essays are marked three times: at first
presentation, at second presentation, and when the final version is
submitted.</p>
<p>Basis of marking: The following will be considered as the main
points in the marking of essays and presentations:</p>

<ul>
<li>Quality of research</li>

<li>Orderly presentation: structure of the essay, the effective use
of evidence, the drawing of conclusions</li>

<li>Clarity of expression</li>

<li>Correct technicalities (i.e., footnotes etc.)</li>
</ul>

<p><u>Format of essays</u>: Essays should normally be arranged in
the following standard format. Optional items are in brackets.</p>

<ol>
<li>Title page</li>

<li>Abstract</li>

<li>(Dedication)</li>

<li>Table of contents</li>

<li>(Tables of maps, diagrams, illustrations etc)</li>

<li>(Table of abbreviations)</li>

<li>Introduction and chapters</li>

<li>(Appendices)</li>

<li>Bibliography</li>

<li>Interview notes [only in final version]</li>
</ol>

<p>If in doubt, please consult your supervisor.</p>

<p>Appendices: Appendices (singular "appendix") are items
"appended" or added to the main text. For example, if you have used
some very important document which is not too long, it may be worth
including the text of that document as an appendix for the benefit
of readers. Another example would be a biographical index: if you
mention a large number of people by name, it may be helpful to the
reader to include a list of them with brief data.</p>

<p><u>Abstract</u>: Your essay must include an abstract, for
purposes of reference. An abstract should contain a brief summary
of the topic and the main <i>conclusions</i>; that is, it should
state not only what questions you have asked but what your answers
are. It must be on one page, for ease of reproduction. Please
submit an extra (loose) copy of your abstract with the final
version, which will be filed separately.</p>

<p><u>Field notes</u>: In the case of essays based wholly or partly
on oral sources, notes of oral interviews (written up) should be
included with the deposited copy, for the use of future
researchers. This fieldwork will be assessed. You should discuss
the format of this with your supervisor.</p>

<p><u>Form of references</u>: You should follow the departmental
guidelines on the format of references. You are advised to follow
these guidelines <b>precisely</b>, not approximately, since
historians often regard carelessness in this matter as evidence of
general sloppiness and grounds for deducting marks. If there are
special reasons to depart from the guidelines, you should consult
your supervisor. Note that History and Archaeology have different
specifications.</p>

<p><u>Illustrations</u>: Take care with illustrations,
especially maps, since good illustrations can enhance your work.
For maps, better results are often obtained by tracing the relevant
features from a printed map before photocopying. Do not leave such
matters to the last minute, but consult your supervisor in good
time.</p>

<p><u>Writers' manuals</u>: There are a number of books in the
Library which you may find useful. We particularly recommend you to
consult two books by Kate Turabian, <i>A Manual for Writers of Term
Papers, Theses, and Dissertations</i>, and <i>Students' Guide for
Writing College Papers</i>. The latter contains useful advice on
how to take notes and organize material. The University Library
holds several copies of each of these.</p>

<p><u>Contact with your supervisor</u>: Regular consultation with
your supervisor is compulsory. Persistent failure to meet your
supervisor may be treated as withdrawal from the course. Drafts
must be submitted to the supervisor before presentation to the
department. Keep in touch with your supervisor, he/she is there to
help.</p>

<p><a name="format" href="#contents">Back to contents</a></p>

<hr>
<center><h2>Notes on the format of references</h2></center>

<p>One general principle must be clearly understood: references and
bibliography are not simply a complicated ritual to satisfy
academic tradition. They are intended to be <i>useful</i> to the
reader, and especially to the future researcher. The conventions of
footnoting are a way of ensuring that all the necessary information
has been provided in a clear and consistent form, and they should
not be departed from without good reason. However, they must be
used intelligently, with the aim of assisting the reader.</p>

<p>In historical essays, references should normally be given in the
traditional footnote format, as this is usually the most
appropriate format for historical writing, where the reader will
want to check at every point the basis of each statement. It is
flexible and allows the reader to note the exact nature of each
source. The author/date system is convenient where all references
are to published secondary sources, which can be assumed to be all
of similar value. This situation, though normal in the natural
sciences and common in archaeology, is not normal in mainstream
history. Although the author/date system is used to some extent in
social and economic history, it is much less flexible than the
traditional footnote, which can cope with any type of data,
including the types of data on which most H403 essays are based.
The History Department has therefore adopted the traditional
footnote as the standard for essays in History. Archaeology
students should follow the specifications of the Archaeology
Unit.</p>

<p>The ideal place for footnotes is at the foot of the page. In the
first (manuscript) version of the dissertation, notes may be placed
at the end, for ease of writing, but in the word-processed versions
footnotes should appear at the foot of the page. In word-processed
essays, you should use the special <i>footnote function</i>. Take
time to study this before you start so as to be sure that you can
use it properly. The footnote function will offer you some options
about how your footnotes should appear. Select the option by which
the footnotes will appear at the bottom of the page. Older
word-processing applications often could not handle footnotes
properly, leading to the widespread use of end-notes, but there is
now no excuse for this.</p>

<p>Footnotes should follow a consistent style, though it is more
important that all the essential details are clearly presented than
that any particular format is followed. A set format is provided so
that writers can be confident they have included all the necessary
details, and if there are special reasons for deviating from the
style these can be discussed with your supervisor.</p>

<p>Abbreviations for titles of journals or other sources should be
used cautiously. The essential principle is that whenever an
abbreviation is used, the reader should be able to find the meaning
without difficulty. This means that there must be a clear and
complete table of abbreviations. Abbreviations are only appropriate
where something is to be repeated frequently, and only the <i>
most</i> used titles should normally be abbreviated.</p>

<p>In the case of published items, the principle is that the first
reference in each chapter to a given item should be in full, but
that subsequent references may be abbreviated. However, these
abbreviated forms should be such as to allow the reader to find the
full form in the Bibliography without difficulty.</p>

<p><u>Format of references</u>:</p>

<p><u>Books</u>:</p>

<p>First reference in each chapter: Author, title (underlined, or
italics if available), place of publication, publisher, date, page
reference.</p>

<p>Example: J.K.Nyerere, <i>Freedom and Unity: A Selection from
Writings and Speeches, 1952-65</i> (Nairobi: Oxford University
Press, 1967) p. 196.</p>

<p>Subsequent references: Author (surname only unless ambiguous),
abbreviated title (underlined, or italics if available), page
reference.</p>

<p>Example: Nyerere, <i>Freedom and Unity</i>, p. 50.</p>

<p>Points to note:</p>

<p>(i) In the author's name, the initials of first names come <i>
before</i> the surname.</p>

<p>(ii) The abbreviation for "page" is "p." (<i>not</i> "pg.") The
abbreviation for "pages" is "pp." (In printed books you will
sometimes see the "p." or "pp." omitted altogether, but it is
included in our format.)</p>

<p>(iii) The "place of publication" is the name of the <i>city</i>
where the book was published. In most cases the name of the city
alone is sufficient, e.g. London, Cambridge, New York, Cape Town,
Gaborone etc. Sometimes it is desirable to include additional
information such as the name of the country. This may be
appropriate</p>

<p>(a) when the name alone would mislead or be ambiguous, e.g.
"Cambridge, Massachusetts"; "Hamilton, New Zealand"</p>

<p>(b) when the city may be unfamiliar to readers, e.g. "Metuchen,
New Jersey".</p>

<p>(iv) The "date of publication" is the date at which the copy of
the book you are using was produced. You may sometimes wish to give
the date of first publication as well. For example, consider this
reference: "John Mackenzie, <i>Ten Years North of the Orange
River</i> (2nd ed., London: Frank Cass, 1971) (first published
1871), p. 91." If you had given the date as 1871 it would mean you
were quoting that edition, but the page numbering might be
different in that edition, and someone looking up p. 91 in that
edition would not find your quotation. So you give the date as
1971, the date of the edition you are using. However, it is worth
noting that the book was actually written a hundred years
earlier.</p>

<p>(v) Books often have a title in two or more parts, a title and a
subtitle. For example, a book by Thomas Tlou has the title <i>A
History of Ngamiland 1750 to 1906.</i> Underneath is written the
subtitle <i>The Formation of an African State</i>. You should write
out the full title, but separate the parts by colons, i.e.: <i>A
History of Ngamiland 1750 to 1906: The Formation of an African
State</i>.</p>

<p>(vi) Underlining is equivalent to italics. Underlining is used
in handwritten work, or when a typewriter or word-processor does
not have italics available.</p>

<p><u>Articles</u>:</p>

<p>First reference in each chapter: Author, title of article (in
quotation marks), title of journal (underlined, or italics if
available), volume/number and date of journal, page reference.</p>

<p>Example: A. Nsibambi, 'Some Reflections on the Uganda
Independence Constitution of 1962', <i>The Uganda Journal</i>, vol.
39 (1980) p. 288.</p>

<p>Subsequent references: Author, abbreviated title of article,
page reference.</p>

<p>Example: Nsibambi, 'Uganda Independence Constitution', p.
288.</p>

<p>Where an article is in a book, the title and bibliographic
details of the book should be given, in the format for books:</p>

<p>Example: M. Odell, 'Local Government: Tradition and Modern Role
of the Village Kgotla', in L. Picard (ed.), <i>The Evolution of
Modern Botswana</i> (London: Rex Collins, 1985). Subsequent
references: Odell, 'Local Government'.</p>

<p><u>Unpublished sources</u> such as dissertations, seminar papers
etc:</p>

<p>First reference in each chapter: Author, title (in quotation
marks), description of the document, date, page reference.</p>

<p>Examples:</p>

<p>Q.N.Parsons, 'Khama III, the Bamangwato and the British with
special reference to 1895-1923' (unpublished Ph.D. thesis,
University of Edinburgh, 1973) p. 200..</p>

<p>D. Wylie, ' "The Centre Cannot Hold": The Decline of the Ngwato
Chieftainship 1925-1950' (unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Yale
University, 1984) p. 254.</p>

<p>P. Monnatsie, 'The Growth and Spread of Religious Sects in
Kgatleng: the case of the Zion Christian Church 1933-77'
(unpublished B.A. dissertation, University of Botswana, 1980).</p>

<p>Bob Hitchcock, 'The Future of Remote Area Development in
Botswana' (unpublished seminar paper, read at National Institute of
Research, 2 July 1988).</p>

<p>Subsequent references: Author, abbreviated title (in quotation
marks), page reference.</p>

<p>Examples: Parsons, 'Khama III', p. 201.</p>

<p>Wylie, 'The Centre Cannot Hold'.</p>

<p>Monnatsie, 'Religious Sects in Kgatleng', p. 10.</p>

<p>Hitchcock, 'Remote Area Development', p. 3.</p>

<p><u>Editors</u>: Where a book consists of pieces by several
authors, it will usually be referred to by the title and the <i>
editor's</i> name. The format is the same as for other books, but
'(ed.)' is put after the editor's name to indicate that this is an
editor rather than an author. For more than one editor, use
'(eds)'.</p>

<p>Example:</p>

<p>First reference: F.Morton and J. Ramsay (eds), <i>The Birth of
Botswana: A History of the Bechuanaland Protectorate from 1910 to
1966</i> (Gaborone: Longman, 1987)</p>

<p>Subsequent references: Morton and Ramsay (eds), <i>The Birth of
Botswana</i>.</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>Published diaries, letters etc. are a special case. There are
two possible formats.</p>

<p>(i) Use the name of the author of the diaries as author. This is
the most appropriate if the diaries were prepared for publication
by their writer.</p>

<p>Example:</p>

<p>If the diaries have been edited by someone else, the editor's
name can be added after the author.</p>

<p>Example: Charles F. Rey (eds N. Parsons &amp; M. Crowder), <i>
Monarch of All I Survey: Bechuanaland Diaries 1929-37</i>
(Gaborone: Botswana Society, 1988).</p>

<p>(ii) The editor's name is used, rather than giving the writer of
the diaries as the author. (This may be more appropriate where the
published version is the result of selection by editors, and
especially in cases such as collections of letters.) However, it is
desirable that the name of the diarist does appear somewhere.
Usually it is included in the title. As well as the page reference,
it is usually helpful to give the date of the diary entry or letter
being cited.</p>

<p>Examples:</p>

<p>First reference: Neil Parsons and Michael Crowder (eds), <i>
Monarch of All I Survey: Bechuanaland Diaries 1929-37, by Sir
Charles Rey</i>, (Gaborone: Botswana Society, 1988), p.136 (Mon. 26
June 1933).</p>

<p>Evelyn Foley Braley (ed.), <i>Letters of Herbert Hensley
Henson</i>. (London, 1950).</p>

<p>Subsequent references: Parsons and Crowder (eds), <i>Monarch of
All I Survey</i> (Rey diaries), p. 111 (Sun 11 to Fri 16 Dec
1932).</p>

<p>Braley (ed.), <i>Letters of Herbert Hensley Henson</i>.</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p><u>Works by more than one author</u>: Where there are two or
three authors, give all the authors' names.</p>

<p>Example:</p>

<p>First reference: R. Molefi, F. Morton and L. Ngcongco, 'The
modernists: Seepapitso, Ntebogang and Isang', in F.Morton and J.
Ramsay (eds), <i>The Birth of Botswana: A History of the
Bechuanaland Protectorate from 1910 to 1966</i> (Gaborone: Longman,
1987) pp. 11-29.</p>

<p>Subsequent references: Molefi, Morton and Ngcongco, 'The
modernists'.</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>Where there are more than three authors, all the authors' names
should appear in the first reference, but in subsequent references
only the first name, followed by <i>et al.</i></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>Example:</p>

<p>First reference: P. Curtin, S. Feierman, L. Thompson and J.
Vansina, <i>African History</i> (London and New York: Longman,
1978), p. 10.</p>

<p>Subsequent references: Curtin <i>et al.</i>, <i>African
History</i>, p. 12.</p>

<p>All authors' names <i>must</i> be given in the Bibliography.</p>

<p><u>Special systems of reference</u>:</p>

<p>You may sometimes use sources which have special systems of
reference of their own. Important examples of these are official
publications, and legal sources such as court reports. If you use
such sources, you should learn how their systems of reference work.
It is very important, especially when you are still learning a new
system, to copy references with great care, exactly as they are
given. Failure to do so can lead to problems. For example, there is
a class of official British government publications called "Command
Papers". These are numbered and referred to as, for example, Cmd.
2345 or Cd. 1234. Unwary students sometimes think that "Cmd" and
"Cd" - which are both abbreviations for "Command" - mean the same
thing. But in fact the different abbreviations indicate different
series of Command Papers. Cd. 1200 and Cmd. 1200 are different
documents. There are many such traps for the unwary; for example in
citing law reports round brackets ( ) and square brackets [ ] are
not interchangeable; in the numbering of British Acts of Parliament
Arabic numerals and Roman numerals must not be confused; etc. The
moral is that until you completely understand a special reference
system, you should not alter <i>anything</i>. Never think "It's
probably the same."</p>

<p><u>Official publications</u>: Sometimes these can be cited in
the same way as other books, but often they are numbered according
to special systems. You should use the official form of reference.
It will sometimes be helpful to give an explanation of this
numbering (perhaps in a preface).</p>

<p>Example: 'Despatch to the Governor of the East Africa
Protectorate relating to native labour, and papers connected
therewith', <i>British Parliamentary Papers</i>, 1920, Cmd. 873,
XXXIII, 81.</p>

<p>It is helpful to give such references as fully as possible,
because they may be catalogued in libraries in different ways (e.g.
under author, under title, or in official numeric sequence). If you
have not given all the details, it may be hard for a reader to
locate the work in question.</p>



<p><u>Law cases</u>: Lawyers have a system of reference of their
own, which should be followed if you wish to cite law cases,
statutes etc. If you are citing such sources, you should get advice
from someone familiar with this system. The legal system of
citation, which looks rather cryptic to the uninitiated, has
developed to meet the peculiar nature of legal sources, and makes
it easy to find the right documents in such sources. Although it is
possible to cite some legal sources as if they were ordinary books,
this is not desirable.</p>



<p><u>Scriptural references</u>:</p>

<p>The Jewish, Christian and Islamic scriptures have special
reference systems which should be used if referring to them.
References to the Christian Bible are given as follows:</p>

<p>Abbreviation for book, chapter (small Roman numerals), verse
(Arabic numerals). (First/Second Book is indicated by large Roman
numeral before the abbreviated title of the book.) Examples:</p>

<p>Matt. xix.
<br>
Matt. xix. 9.
<br>
Gen. vi 1-3.
<br>
I Cor. vii. 15</p>

<p>The above format is Cambridge University Press style. An
alternative style, which is used by the Theology and Religious
Studies Department of this university, is to write both chapter and
verse in Arabic numerals, separated by a colon; thus:</p>

<p>Matt. 19.
<br>
Matt. 19: 9.
<br>
Gen. 6: 1-3.
<br>
I Cor. 7: 15</p>

<p>Note that it is not normal to cite the Bible as a book with
title, publisher etc.: just give the reference as shown above. Do
not include the Bible in the Bibliography.</p>

<p>For other technicalities of scriptural reference, such as the
indication of particular translations, (AV, RSV, etc.) use the
standard format. You may wish to give an explanation (either in the
note or in your table of abbreviations) for readers less familiar
with the system.</p>

<p><a href="#contents" name="archive">Back to contents</a></p>

<h3>Archive references</h3>

<p>Archive references must be as full and clear as possible. As
well as enabling the researcher to locate the document in question
for further examination, an archive reference allows the reader to
assess the significance of the evidence being presented. This is,
of course, one reason why it is important to place footnotes at the
foot of the page, so that the serious reader can glance at each
note.</p>

<p>Each reference should indicate (i) where the document is located
(ii) the nature of the document, and (if appropriate) which part of
the document is being referred to. The normal format of an archive
footnote will be as follows:</p>

<p>Archive location, archive reference, description of document,
date, reference within document (if any).</p>

<p>Example:</p>

<p>Botswana National Archives, S. 178/1; R.C. Williams to Rev. W.C.
Willoughby, 26 Sept 1902.</p>

<p>In this example, the parts may be analysed as follows:</p>

<p>Archive location: Botswana National Archives</p>

<p>Archive reference: S. 178/1</p>

<p>Description of document: R.C. Williams to Rev. W.C.
Willoughby</p>

<p>Date: 26 Sept 1902</p>

<p>Reference within document (if any): [not given]</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>Another example:</p>

<p>Cambridge, Churchill College Archive Centre, Swinton Papers,
SWIN II.270/3/8, fols 8-10; Cunliffe-Lister to Byrne, 26 Mar. 1934,
p. 2</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<table border="1" cellspacing="1" cellpadding="8" width="100%"
style="background-color: #FFCCcc; border: solid medium #666666"
summary="Table showing elements in an archive citation">
<tr>
<td width="50%" valign="TOP">Archive location</td>
<td width="50%" valign="TOP">Cambridge, Churchill College Archive
Centre</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td width="50%" valign="TOP">Archive reference:</td>
<td width="50%" valign="TOP">Swinton Papers, SWIN II.270/3/8, fols
8-10</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td width="50%" valign="TOP">Description of document</td>
<td width="50%" valign="TOP">Cunliffe-Lister to Byrne</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td width="50%" valign="TOP">Date</td>
<td width="50%" valign="TOP">26 Mar. 1934</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td width="50%" valign="TOP">Reference within document (if
any)</td>
<td width="50%" valign="TOP">p. 2</td>
</tr>
</table>

<p><u>Archive location</u>: Give the name of the archive and its
whereabouts: for example "Khama III Memorial Museum, Serowe". If
you are consulting papers which are not in a library or archive
(e.g. family papers in the possession of the family concerned) omit
this item but explain in the Bibliography where the papers are
held.</p>

<p><u>Archive reference</u>: This should be the reference used by
the archive, i.e. the reference you use in ordering the document.
(Official documents may have original filing numbers which are
different; do not confuse these with the archive reference.) The
form of the archive reference will vary. As well as this basic
archive reference (which identifies a folder or a box of documents,
etc.) you may be able to specify where in this folder or box the
document is to be found. This is possible if the papers have been
numbered within the folder or box. The numbering may be <i>item
number</i> (each document is numbered in sequence), <i>folio
number</i> (each leaf of paper is numbered in sequence) or <i>page
number</i> (each side of each leaf of paper is numbered in sequence
as in an ordinary book; normally only used when papers have been
bound in a volume). In the second of the two examples above, a
folio-number reference (abbreviation "fol."/ "fols") is given.</p>

<p><u>Description of document</u>: In the case of a letter, the
format is '<i>Sender</i> to <i>Addressee</i>.' If a document is a
report with a title, the title (in quotation marks) should be
given, with the author's name (if known).</p>

<p>Example: BNA S. 214/1/2; Tshekedi Khama, 'The Batawana-Damara
trouble', 21 Sept 1940.</p>

<p><u>Reference within document</u>: if a document is long, and you
are referring to a particular part of it, you should give a
reference (usually a page reference) within it. For example: Report
by J.Smith, p. 5. If a document is numbered by paragraphs rather
than pages, it will probably be better to give a paragraph
reference. Example: Report by J.Smith, para. 57.</p>

<p>Documents of other sorts should be described as clearly as
possible, indicating their nature and author.</p>

<p>Examples:</p>

<p>Memorandum by J.Smith</p>

<p>Note (unsigned)</p>

<p>Draft of J.Smith to R.Jones, 1 Jan 1900 (apparently not
sent).</p>

<p>Often an official letter will be headed "Despatch", etc., but
this is not significant. Write "J. Smith to K. Jones, 31 Jan.
1901", <i>not</i> "Despatch from J. Smith to K. Jones, 31 Jan.
1901". "Despatch" is not significant because in the Bechuanaland
Protectorate administration it merely indicated an ordinary written
message from one official to another. However, if the message was
of a special type you might indicate this. For example, you might
note that a document is a telegram, suggesting that it was
urgent:</p>

<p>"J. Smith to K. Jones (telegram), 31 Jan. 1901"</p>

<p>Additional information such as security classifications may be
included if you think it may be relevant:</p>

<p>"J. Smith to K. Jones (Secret), 31 Jan. 1901"</p>

<p><u>Abbreviations</u>: 'Botswana National Archives' may be
abbreviated to 'BNA'. Other abbreviations, if used, <i>must</i> be
set out in a prominent, clear and complete table of abbreviations,
and the full form should be used the first time in each chapter. In
general, abbreviations should be used cautiously in archive
references as they can easily become confusing.</p>

<p><u>Incomplete information</u>: where no date is given, write
'n.d.' (no date). If you are able to provide information which is
not stated in the document, give it in square brackets. For
example, if a letter is addressed to 'John' and it is clear that
this is John Smith, you would write: 'A.N.Other to John [Smith]'.
This indicates that a detail is your deduction rather than stated
in the document.</p>

<p>The following are some examples of footnotes describing a
variety of documents.</p>

<p>Botswana National Archives, HC 40/109; Kanye Despatch S. of S.
to Sir Hercules Robinson, 15 Nov 1887.</p>

<p>B.N.A., S. 568/13/1-4; Kasane Establishment of Northern Game
Reserve</p>

<p>National Archives of Lesotho, S 3/1/6/1; Sheep scab; Principal
Veterinary Surgeon to Government Secretary, 20 Apr 1905.</p>

<p>B.N.A., MICRO 715; Kgalagadi District, Hitchcock R.C.: Northern
Kgalagadi District Extra Rural Dwellers Reconnaissance and
Consultation, Report 2, Aug 1977.</p>

<p>B.N.A., S. 214/1/2; Minutes of meeting to settle the Damara
troubles, 10 Dec 1940.</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p><u>References quoted from another source</u>: where a reference
is taken from an existing source, and you have not yourself checked
the original, this should be made clear as in the following
examples:</p>

<p>D. Mudoola, 'The Pathology of Institution Building - The
Tanzanian Case', in F.G.Kiros (ed.) <i>Challenging Rural
Poverty</i> (Trenton, New Jersey: African World Press, 1985) p.
119; quoted in Apolo Robin Nsibambi, 'One-party rule in Tanzania
and Uganda: how democratic?', in J.Holm and P.Molutsi (eds), <i>
Democracy in Botswana: The Proceedings of a Symposium held in
Gaborone, 1-5 August 1988</i> (Gaborone: Macmillan, 1989) p.
29.</p>

<p>Khama III to High Commissioner, 21 Aug 1922; quoted in
Q.N.Parsons, 'Khama III, the Bamangwato and the British with
special reference to 1895-1923' (unpublished Ph.D. thesis,
University of Edinburgh, 1973) p. 397.</p>

<p>High Court Case No. 8 of 1931, cited in Wylie, 'The Centre
Cannot Hold', p. 143.</p>

<p><u>References to oral sources</u>:</p>

<p>The usual format is as follows:</p>

<p>Name of interviewee, age of interviewee, occupation or other
description of interviewee, place and date of interview.</p>

<p>Example:</p>

<p>Interview with Mr J. Smith, 67, farmer, Serowe, 12 July
1999.</p>

<p>The description of the interviewee will vary. Often it is
sufficient merely to give the informant's occupation, but any
special facts should be noted, unless they have already been given
in the text. For example, if the informant is talking about the
activities of a club, the fact that he or she was secretary of that
club would be relevant. If the informant is talking about a
particular person, his or her relationship with that person is
relevant. Thus:</p>

<p>Interview with Mr L. Sefane, 44, farmer, and secretary of the
Aardvark-Breeders Club, Maun, 12 July 1999.</p>

<p>Interview with Mrs J. Smith, 83, retired, sister of the late
Theophilus Buggins, Maun, 12 July 1999.</p>

<p>Although occupation is <i>usually</i> the main description, in
some cases you might instead identify a person in some other way.
For example, suppose an interviewee was a farmer by occupation, but
was also a member of a Land Board. If you were interviewing the
person about the Land Board's activities, it would be more
appropriate to give this rather the occupation. If both were
relevant, you could put both. Thus:</p>

<p>Interview with Mr L. Sefane, 55, member of Erewhon Land Board,
Maun, 12 July 1999.</p>

<p>Interview with Mr L. Sefane, 55, farmer, and member of Erewhon
Land Board, Maun, 12 July 1999.</p>

<p>Note that the important thing is what will be <i>useful</i> for
the reader to know.</p>

<p>References to oral sources quoted from existing written sources
should be given as 'quoted in...' as above.</p>

<p>Examples:</p>

<p>Otsile Moseweu, speaking at a kgotla meeting held at Serowe, 7
Jan 1927, cited in Wylie, 'The Centre Cannot Hold', p. 254.</p>

<p>Interview with Difatlhwe Seame, Tlokeng ward, Mochudi, 16 June
1988; quoted in P.T.Mgadla and A.C.Campbell, 'Dikgotla, dikgosi and
the protectorate administration', in J.Holm and P.Molutsi (eds),
<i>Democracy in Botswana: The Proceedings of a Symposium held in
Gaborone, 1-5 August 1988</i> (Gaborone: Macmillan, 1989), p.
48.</p>

<p>In some cases, you may be citing an interview from a transcript
or summary, which may be a published work or an unpublished paper.
The written source should be cited in the usual way. Remember that
it may be helpful to indicate where an unpublished paper can be
found.</p>

<p>Example for a published source: Interview with J.Smith, aged 79,
farmer, Erewhon, 25 Dec 1997; in R. Jones (ed.), <i>Imaginary
Published Collection of Interviews</i> (Erewhon: Nonesse House,
1998) p. 32.</p>

<p>Example for unpublished transcripts: (Footnote:) Interview with
J.Smith, aged 79, farmer, Erewhon, 25 Dec 1997; in A.N.Other,
'Notes of interviews with Erewhon farmers, 1996-7', (unpublished
notes, 1997, University of Botswana Library), p. 21.</p>

<p>(Bibliography:) A.N. Other, 'Notes of interviews with Erewhon
farmers, 1996-7', (unpublished notes, 1997, University of Botswana
Library).</p>

<p><u>Note on the use of "[Place] Historical Texts"</u>: There
seems to be a misapprehension that all oral interviews should be
referred to as 'Francistown Historical Texts' (or whatever the
location was). This term is not a synonym for "interview".
You should simply refer to 'Interview with so-and-so,
etc.'</p>



<p>Examples:</p>

<p>(First reference:) Interview with Mr J. Smith, 76, farmer,
Nullepart, 25 July 1998; in A. Student, "Nullepart interviews
concerning the local economy 1919-45" (unpublished notes, 1999,
University of Botswana Library) p. 44.</p>

<p>(Subsequent references:) Interview with Mr J. Smith, 76, farmer,
Nullepart, 25 July 1998; in A. Student, "Nullepart interviews" p.
44.</p>

<h3>Bibliography</h3>

<p>The bibliography should list all the sources used, in a similar
form to footnotes, but with a few differences.</p>

<p>(1) Within each category of source, items should be listed in
alphabetical order of author, with initials after the surname.</p>

<p>Example: Nsibambi, A., 'Some Reflections on the Uganda
Independence Constitution of 1962', <i>The Uganda Journal</i>, vol.
39 (1980).</p>

<p>(2) Where large numbers of documents are cited, it is not
customary to cite all documents individually; instead the files
used are indicated. You should discuss with your supervisor the
most appropriate form for this, as it is most important that the
information should be <i>useful</i>, and the exact format should be
chosen accordingly.</p>

<p>(3) Where an item is unpublished, or rare, it is helpful to
indicate where it is available, especially if it is not in the
University of Botswana Library.</p>

<p>Example: Smith, J., 'An imaginary seminar paper' (unpublished
seminar paper, read at University of Zimbabwe, 25 Dec 1995; copy
held at the Botswana National Library).</p>

<p>The bibliography should be arranged by type of source: e.g.,
Oral interviews; Primary sources (archives); Primary sources
(published); Secondary sources (published); Secondary sources
(unpublished). This should be discussed with your supervisor.</p>

<hr>
<a name="title_page" href="#contents">Back to contents</a>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<center>Title page format for Research Essays</center>


<p>The following format for the title page of H403 essays was
agreed by the History Department at the meeting of 26 April
1996 ("H403" has been changed to "HIS472")</p>

<table border="1" bgcolor="#FFFFCC" cellspacing="1" cellpadding="5" width="100%" summary="layout table for example title page">
<tr>
<td valign="TOP" width="100%">
<center><b>Title of essay</b></center>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<center>John Smith</center>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<center>A Research Essay submitted to the History Department, University of Botswana</center>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<center>in fulfilment of the requirements for the course</center>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<center>"Research Project in History" [OR "in Archaeology"] (HIS472)</center>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<center>April 1998</center>
</td>
</tr>
</table>

<hr>
<a name="author-date" href="#contents">Back to contents</a>
<p>&nbsp;</p>

<center><h2>Author-date style (Archaeology only)</h2></center>

<p><small>[Note that author-date style is usual in Archaeology, but not in History. For History essays use the footnote system described above.]</small></p>

<p>In the author-date system, instead of a footnote marker, a
reference is followed by a citation giving the author, the date,
and the page number. The full details are given in the
bibliography. In this system it is vital that the full and correct
details appear in the bibliography, because without this the
citation is meaningless.</p>

<p>The general comments made above about when to write references,
etc., apply to both systems.</p>

<p><u>The bibliography</u>:</p>

<p><u>Books</u>: Author (surname first), date. Title (in italics).
Place of publication: publisher. (<i>Or</i> series
information.)</p>

<p>(Examples:) Beach, D.N. 1980. <i>The Shona and Zimbabwe</i>.
London: Heinemann.</p>

<p>Dahl, G. and Hjort, A. 1976. <i>Having Herds: Pastoral Herd
Growth and Household Economy</i>. Stockholm Studies in Social
Anthropology 2, University of Stockholm.</p>

<p><u>Articles in journals</u>: Author (surname first), date. Title
of article (non-italic, without quotation marks). Title of journal
(italics), volume number: pages.</p>

<p>(Examples:) Sutton, J.E.G. 1993. The antecedents of the
Interlacustrine kingdoms. <i>Journal of African History</i>, 34:
33-64.</p>

<p>Reid, D.A.M. and McLean, M.R. 1995. Symbolism and the social
contexts of iron production in Karagwe. <i>World Archaeology</i>,
27(1): 144-61.</p>

<p>Note that in the latter example, the volume number appears as
"27(1)", meaning "vol. 27, no. 1".</p>

<p><u>Chapters or articles in books</u>:</p>

<p>The format is similar to that for articles in journals. Note the
following example:</p>

<p>Posnansky, M. 1975. Connections between the Lacustrine peoples
and the coast. In <i>East Africa and the Orient</i> (eds H.N.
Chittick and R.I. Rotberg). London: Africana Publishing, pp.
216-25.</p>

<p><u>Unpublished sources</u> such as dissertations, seminar papers
etc:</p>

<p>Author (surname first), date. Title (non-italics, no quotation
marks). Desciption of the document.</p>

<p>(Examples:) Schick, K.A. 1984. Processes of Paleolithic site
formation: an experimental study. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
University of California, Berkeley.</p>

<p>Hitchcock, Bob. 1988. The future of Remote Area Development in
Botswana. Unpublished seminar paper, read at National Institute of
Research, Gaborone, 2 July 1988.</p>

<p><u>Items by the same author</u>: Instead of repeating the name
of the author each time, it may be replaced, after the first item,
by a long dash --- (length of three m-dashes together).</p>

<p>Example:</p>

<p>Schapera, I. 1938. <i>A Handbook of Tswana Law and Custom</i>.
London: Oxford University Press.</p>

<p>---1965. <i>Praise Poems of Tswana Chiefs</i>. Oxford:
Clarendon.</p>

<p><u>The reference</u>: The reference, which appears instead of a
footnote marker, is in the form (author date: page(s)).
Example:</p>

<p>"This was according to Tswana custom. (Schapera 1938: 33)"</p>

<p>If the author's name has just been mentioned in the text, them
it can be omitted, providing the meaning is quite clear. For
example:</p>

<p>"Schapera records (1938: 33) that this was the custom."</p>

<p><u>Avoiding ambiguity</u>: Generally, the surname and date will
be sufficient to identify each item in the bibliography. However,
note the two following special cases:</p>

<p><i>Two authors with same surname:</i> An initial can be used
with the name. Example: (J. Smith 1992: 11) and (K. Smith 1992:
22).</p>

<p><i>Two works by the same author in the same year:</i> Add
letters after the date to distinguish items. For example, in the
bibliography:</p>

<p>Schapera, I. 1965a. Contract in Tswana case law. <i>Journal of
African Law</i>, 9: 142-53.</p>

<p>--- 1965b. <i>Praise Poems of Tswana Chiefs</i>. Oxford:
Clarendon.</p>

<p>Now references can be written: (Schapera 1965a: 144) and
(Schapera 1965b: 12).</p>

<p><u>References outside the author-date system</u>: If sources are
used which the author-date system does not provide for (such as
archival references) footnotes or end-notes may be used for these
sources. If in any doubt, consult your supervisor.</p>

<hr>
<p><a name="doc_end" href="#doc_top">Back to top</a></p>

<p><small>Copyright &copy; 1999 University of Botswana History
Department
<BR>
Last updated 15 October 2003</small></p>
</body>
</html>

 contentType 9 text/html url 54 http://www.thuto.org:80/ubh/ub/courses/his471/471g.htm responseCode 3 200 