xqpagihgmcegxcaczqymhgrilgtieklobmbsoqsq length 5 54539 page 54539 <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML 3.0//EN//" >

<html>
<head>

<title>Andre Gunder Frank:  Preface to ReOrient</title>

</head>
<body>
<table width=100%>
<tr>
  <td valign="top">
<h1>Andre Gunder Frank</h1>
<h2>
Preface to ReOrient
</h2>

  <td align="right">
<font size=-1>
<a href="index.html">Table of Contents</a><br>
<a href="personal.html">Personal and Professional</a><br>
<a href="research.html">Research Interests</a><br>
<a href="pubs_new.html">Publications</a><br>
<a href="reorient.html"><i>ReOrient: Global Economy in the Asian Age</i></a><br>
<a href="new_world_order.html">On the New World Order</a><br>
<a href="online.html">On-line Essays</a><br>
<a href="IISG_Pubs.html">IISH Archives</a><br>
<a href="agf_internet.htm">AGF on the Internet</a><br>
<a href="mailto:agfrank@neu.edu">Contact A.G. Frank</a>


</font>

</table>

<P>
The following passages are excerpted from the introduction of
<a href="reorient.html">ReORIENT</a>: Global Economy in the Asian Age.

<h3 align="center">An Introduction to Eurocentrism</h3>

<p>
<blockquote>
          The really important lesson to be learned from Marx and
          Weber is the importance of history for the
          understanding of society. Though they were certainly
          interested in grasping the general and universal, they
          concerned themselves with the concrete circumstances of
          specific periods, and the similarities and contrasts of
          diverse geographical areas. They clearly recognized
          that an adequate explanation of social facts requires a
          historical account of how the facts came to be; they
          recognized that comparative-historical analysis is
          indispensable for the study of stability and change. In
          a word, it is these two extraordinary thinkers in
          particular, who stand out as the architects of a
          historical sociology well worth emulating; for both of
          them subscribed to an open, historically grounded
          theory and method. 
</blockquote>
<p align="right">
Irving Zeitlin<br>
IDEOLOGY AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY [1994]


<p>
<blockquote>
          For Marx, the most general level of abstraction [is]...
          the concept of mode or production. The classics [were]
          innovatory both in their times and as regards world
          order today, and ... pointing the way forward... for
          study in the present and future. 
</blockquote>
<p align="right">
James Mittleman <br>
INNOVATION AND TRANSFORMATION IN INTERNATIONAL STUDIES [1997]


<p>
<blockquote>
          The expectation of universality, however sincerely
          pursued, has not been fulfilled thus far in the
          historical development of the social sciences.... It is
          hardly surprising that the social sciences that were
          constructed in Europe and North America in the
          nineteenth century were Eurocentric. The European world
          of the time felt itself culturally triumphant ....
          Every universalism sets off responses to itself, and
          these responses are in some sense determined by the
          nature of the reigning universalism(s).... Submitting
          our theoretical premises to inspection for hidden
          unjustified a priori assumptions is a priority for the
          social sciences today.
</blockquote>
<p align="right">
Immanuel Wallerstein for Gulbenkian Commission <br>
OPENING THE SOCIAL SCIENCES [1996]


<P>
My multiple choice is NONE of the above. My argument below is
that all Western social science of the past 150 years from Marx
Weber to Wallerstein himself is ir-remediably Eurocentric and NOT
universalist in any manner, shape or form. Contrary to Zeitlin
and Mittleman Marx and Co. are NOT worthy of emulation, and
certainly not for the present and still less for the future.

<P>
At least since Marx and Engels' COMMUNIST MANIFESTO 
"The West" has for some time now perceived much of "The Rest" of
the world under the title "Orientalism." The Western world is
replete with "Oriental" studies, institutes and what not. This 
Western ideological stance was magnificently analyzed and
denounced under the title Orientalism by the Palestinian American
Edward Said (1979). He shows how the very [Western] point about
"Orientalism" is that it attempts to mark off "the Rest" in order
to distinguish The West and its alleged "exceptionalism."  This
procedure has also been denounced by Samir Amin (1989) under the
title Eurocentrism.  Martin Bernal (1987) has shown how, as part
and parcel of European colonialism in the nineteenth century,
Europeans invented a historical myth about their allegedly purely
European roots in "democratic" but also slave holding and sexist
Greece, whose own roots in turn however are those of Black
Athena. This Bernal thesis, apparently against the original
intentions of its author, has been used in turn to support The
Afrocentric Idea (Asante 1987). In fact, the roots of Athens were
much more in Asia Minor, Persia, Central Asia and other parts of
Asia than in Egypt and Nubia. To compromise and conciliate, we
could say that they were and are primarily Afro-Asian. However,
European "Roots" were of course by no means confined to Greece
and Rome [nor to Egypt and Mesopotamia before them]. The roots of
Europe extended into all of Afro-Eurasia since time immemorial.
We will observe in this book how Europe was still dependent on
Asia also during early modern times, before the nineteenth
century invention and propagation of the "Eurocentric Idea."

<P>
This Eurocentric Idea consists of several strands, some of which
are privileged more by political economists like Marx and
Sombart, and others by sociologists like Durkheim, Simmel, and
Weber. The last named did the most deliberately to assemble,
combine and embellish these features of Eurocentrism. All of them
allegedly serve to explain The European Miracle, which is the
telling title of the book by Eric L. Jones (1981). However, this
book is only a particularly visible tip of the iceberg of almost
all western social science and history from Marx and Weber,
through Spengler and Toynbee, to the spate of defenses of
supposed Western "exceptionalism" since World War II,
particularly in the United States. 

<P>
The use and abuse of this kind of Eurocentric "theory" has been
critically summarized with regard to Islam, although the same
applies equally to other parts of "The Orient":

<blockquote>
     The syndrome consists of a number of basic arguments: (i)
     social development is caused by characteristics which are
     internal to society; (ii) the historical development of
     society is either an evolutionary process or a gradual
     decline. These arguments allow Orientalists to establish
     their dichotomous ideal types of Western society whose inner
     essence unfolds in a dynamic process towards democratic
     industrialism ... (Turner 1978: 81 cited by Fitzpatrick
     (1992: 515).
</blockquote>

However, as the Islamicist and world historian Marshall Hodgson
wrote

<blockquote>
     All attempts that I have yet seen to invoke pre-Modern
     seminal traits in the Occident can be shown to fail under
     close historical analysis, once other societies begin to be
     known as intimately as the Occident. This also applies to
     the great master, Max Weber, who tried to show that the
     Occident inherited a unique combination of rationality and
     activism (Hodgson 1993:86).
</blockquote>

<P>
Hodgson (1993) and Blaut (1991,1992,1993a,1997) derisorally call
this a"tunnel history" that is derived from a tunnel vision,
which sees only "exceptional" intra-European causes and
consequences and is blind to all extra-European contributions to
modern European and world history. Yet as Blaut points out, in
1492 or 1500 Europe still had no advantages of any kind over Asia
and Africa, nor did they have any distinctively different "modes
of production." In 1500 and even later, there would have been no
reason to anticipate the triumph of Europe or its "capitalism"
three and more centuries later. The sixteenth and seventeenth
century development of economic, scientific, rational
"technicalism" that Hodgson regards as the basis of the
subsequent major "transmutation" nonetheless also occurred, as he
insists, on a world-wide basis and not exclusively or even
especially in Europe.

<h3 align="center">FROM SMITH TO MARX</h3>

<P>
So it is not surprising that, among European observers of special
interest for us, Adam Smith and Karl Marx also regarded these
matters of great importance and interest. However, they also did
so from the already different perspectives of their respective
times. Smith and Marx both agreed and disagreed about early
modern history and the place of Asia in it.  Smith wrote in The
Wealth of Nations in 1776:

<blockquote>
     The discovery of America, and that of the passage to the
     East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope, are the two greatest
     events recorded in the history of mankind (Smith
     1776/1937:557).
</blockquote>


Marx and Engels followed in their Communist Manifesto in 1848:
 
<blockquote>
     The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened
     up fresh ground for the rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian
     and Chinese markets, the colonization of America, trade with
     the colonies, the increase in the means of exchange and in
     commodities generally, gave  to commerce, to navigation, to
     industry, an impulse never before known, and thereby to the
     revolutionary element in the tottering feudal society, a
     rapid development.... (Marx and Engels 1848).
</blockquote>


Alas however, Smith - writing still before the industrial
revolution in Europe but echoing Hume who wrote a quarter century
earlier - was the last major [Western] social scientist to
appreciate that Europe was a johnny come lately in the
development of the wealth of nations. "China is a much richer
country than any part of Europe"  Smith  remarked in 1776. 
Smith did not anticipate any change in this comparison and showed
no awareness that he was writing at the beginning of what has
come to be called the "industrial revolution."  Moroever as
Wrigley (1994:27 ff) notes, neither did Malthus or Ricardo one
and two generations later, and even John Stuart Mill writing in
the mid-nineteenth century still had his doubts.
  
<P>
However, Smith also did not regard the "greatest events in the
history" to have been a European gift to mankind, of
civilization, capitalism or anything else. On the contrary, he
noted with alarm that

<blockquote>
     to the natives, however, both of the East and the West
     Indies, all the commercial benefits which can have resulted
     from those events have been sunk and lost in the dreadful
     misfortunes which they have occasioned.... What benefits, or
     what misfortunes to mankind may hereafter result from these
     great events, no human wisdom can foresee (Smith 1937: 189).
</blockquote>


However already by the mid-nineteenth century, European views of
Asia and China in particular had drastically changed. Dawson
(1967) documents and analyzes this change under the revealing
title The Chinese Chameleon: An Analysis of European Conceptions
of Chinese Civilization. Europeans changed from regarding China
as "an example and model" to calling the Chinese "a people of
eternal standstill." Why this rather abrupt change? The coming of
the industrial revolution and the beginnings of European
colonialism in Asia had intervened to re-shape European minds, if
not to "invent" all history, then at least to invent a false
universalism under European initiation and guidance. Then in the
second half of the nineteenth century, not only was world history
re-written wholesale, but "universal" social "science" was [new]
born, not only as a European, but as a Eurocentric invention. 

<P>
In so doing, "classical" historians and social theorists of the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries took a huge step backward even
from European, not to mention Islamic, perspectives that had been
much more realistically world embracing up through the eighteenth
century. Among those who saw things from this narrower [European]
new perspective were Marx and Weber. According to them and all of
their many disciples to this day, the essentials of the
"capitalist mode of production" that allegedly developed in and
out of Europe were missing in "The Rest" of the world and could
be and were supplied only through European help and diffusion.
That is where the "Orientalist" assumptions by Marx, and many
more studies by Weber, and the [fallacious] assertions of both
about the rest of the world come in. To briefly review them, we
may here follow not only my own reading of these "masters" but
also, to pick one among many, that of so authoritative a reader
as Irving Zeitlin (1994). 

<h3 align="center">THE ASIATIC MODE OF PRODUCTION</h3>

<P>
Perry Anderson (1974:548) asked that the Asiatic Mode of
Production [AMP] "be given the decent burial that it deserves."
That is very decent of him, since the AMP hardly deserves even
that. We need not go into the controversial and controverted
history of this "concept" to see that on the evidence it never
had the slightest basis in fact to begin with. I say 'to begin
with,' because before the AMP was invented all the world already
knew that the real world was not that way at all.  Various
citations above testify to the knowledge even in Europe of the
economic, political, social, and cultural advances and
developments in Egypt, West Asia, South Asia and East Asia. Still
in 1776, Adam Smith testified that on all accounts China and
India were ahead of Europe even in technology. Why then did he
also say that China seemed not to have changed in five centuries
past?  Of course, that was not so; but if it had been, it would
mean that China was so far advanced earlier on that Europe had
been unable to catch up even with five centuries of its own
development. In fact, China was far more developed; and as we
have seen its economy continued to expand and develop. So did
most other parts of Asia. We have observed above that, far from
Asia being "stagnant," population, production, and trade expanded
rapidly; and economic and financial institutions generated or at
least permitted the same.

<P>
Therefore, Marx's description of China as a "mummy preserved in a
hermetically sealed coffin ... vegetating in the teeth of time"
had absolutely no basis in fact.  Nor did his idea that a
supposed AMP reigned in India, Persia, Egypt or anywhere else.
That was no more than "Orientalism painted Red" as Tibebu (1990)
aptly remarked. Marx's contention that "in broad outline,
Asiatic, ancient, feudal, and modern bourgeois modes of
production may be designated as epochs marking progress in the
economic development of society" was pure ideological fiction and
had no basis in fact or science [quotations from Marx are from
Brook (1989:11,6)]. There never have been any such epochs, and
the very idea of unilinear transitions from one "mode of
production" to another, be they on a "societal" or a world-wide
basis, only divert attention from the real historical process,
which has been world-wide, but horizontally integrative and
cyclical. 

<P>
Alas, "the importance of Marx's analysis of Asia is ... that it
functioned as an integral part of the process through which he
constructed his theory of capitalism" (Brook 1989:6). "The
importance of Orientalism for the study of Marxism lies ... [in]
the notion that, in contrast to Western society, Islamic [and
other Oriental] civilization is static and locked within its
sacred customs, its formal moral code, and its religious law"
(Turner 1978:6). To that extent, Marx's entire "theory of
capitalism" was vitiated both by the lack of support from the
Eurocentric leg of its fables about a supposed Asian Mode of
Production  and by his equally Eurocentric supposition that
Europe was different and that what happened there must have
originated in Europe. We have seen that no such thing really
originated --  let alone because of any supposed transition from
feudalism to capitalism -- in Europe. The historical process was
world-wide and world - including Europe - encompassing.   

<P>
For another severe theoretical and empirical critique of the AMP,
see Islamoglu-Inan (1987) and several of the contributors to the
book she edited on The Ottoman Empire and the World-Economy. It
illustrates how slavish or even only servile attempts to squeeze
the evidence into, and even uncomfortable rebellion to escape
from this procrustean category, handicaps and contorts rather
than aids and extends the analysis of the authors' own evidence.
Alas, the same book also vividly illustrates how limiting is not
only the category of the "Asiatic," but also the "Capitalist Mode
of Production" as well as Wallerstein's European based "modern
world-system" and the idea of its "incorporation" of the Ottomans
or any other region in Asia, to which we return below.

<P>
Marx seems to have been selective in the sources he drew on to
characterize "Asia" not to mention Africa. Among the classical
political economists that also influenced Marx so much as we have
already observed, Smith (1937: 348) had given "credit to the
wonderful accounts of the wealth and cultivation of China, of
those of antient Egypt and of the antient state of Indostan." In
this regard however, Marx preferred to follow Montesquieu and the
Philosophes like Roussseau and also James Mill, who had instead
"discovered" "despotism" as the "natural" condition and "model of
government" in Asia and of "The Orient."  Marx also remarked on
"the cruellest form of state, Oriental despotism, from India to
Russia." He also attributed to them and to the Ottomans, Persia
and China, indeed to the whole "Orient." In all of these, Marx
alleged the existence of an age-old "Asiatic Mode of Production."
He alleged that in all of Asia the forces of production remained
stagnant and stationary until the incursion of "The West" and
"capitalism" woke it of its otherwise eternal slumber. 

<P>
Although Marx noted that the Indian and Chinese purchasing power
gave impulse to European markets, England was allegedly showing
India the mirror of its future and the United States was bringing
progress to Mexico thanks to its 1846 war against that country.
Furthermore, Marx alleged that the "transition from feudalism to
capitalism" and the "rising bourgeoisie"  in Europe had
transformed the world, supposedly since the genesis of capital
[if not capitalism] in the sixteenth century - also in Europe! 
For Marx, Asia still remained even more backward than Europe,
where "feudalism" at least had the seeds of a "transition to
capitalism" within itself. In alleged contrast, "The Asiatic Mode
of Production" would required the progressive benefits of this
"transition" in Europe to jolt and pull it out of its built in
stagnation -- even though he said that it was the Asian markets
that gave impetus to those of Europe! The supposed reason for
this alleged stagnation was the imagined lack of "capitalist
relations of production," which kept all of Asia "divided into
villages, each of which possessed a completely separate
organization and formed a little world to itself."  

<P>
Alas, this division of Asia into separate little worlds was
already contradicted by the simultaneous claims of Marx and other
European writers that Asia was also characterized by "Oriental
Despotism."  That was regarded to be a form of socio-political
organization that was necessary to manage these societies' large
scale irrigation projects, which were of course themselves
incompatible with the allegedly isolated villages.  Wittfogel
(1957) would later popularize this "theory," but then ironically
as a cold-war ideological weapon against "communism" and Marxism!
But never mind all these internal contradictions! For as we will
see below throughout this book, all of this Marxian
characterization was no more than a figment of his and other
Eurocentric imagination anyway, which had no foundation in
historical reality whatsoever. 

<P>
Indeed, in his excellent critique of Marxists like Perry Anderson
and others, Teshale Tibebu (1990: 83-85 emphasis in original)
argues persuasively that much of their analysis of "Feudalism,
Absolutism and the Bourgeois Revolution"  and  "their obsession
with the specificity ... [and] supposed superiority of Europe" is
Western "civilizational arrogance," "ideology dressed up as
history" and "Orientalism painted red," that is the "continuation
of orientalism by other means."

<P>
Marxist economic history may seem different, but it is equally,
indeed even more, Eurocentric. Thus, Marxist economic historians
also look for the sources of "The Rise of the West" and "the
development of capitalism" within Europe.  Examples are the
famous debate in the 1950s on "the transition from feudalism to
capitalism" among Maurice Dobb, Paul Sweezy, Kohachiro Takahashi,
Rodney Hilton and others (reprinted in Hilton 1976) and the
Brenner Debate on "European feudalism" (Aston and Philpin, Eds.
1985). De Ste. Croix (1981) on the class struggles in the ancient
"Greco-Roman" civilization and Anderson (1974) on "Japanese
feudalism" also considered each of these as a particular
"society." Marxists may claim to devote more attention to how the
economic "infrastructure" shapes society; but they show no
awareness of how one "society" is shaped by its relations with
another "society" and still less of how all societies were shaped
by their common participation in a single world economy. The very
existence of a world economic system was explicitly denied by
Marx and only belatedly acknowledged by Lenin. However, his
"imperialism" also was of recent European origin. In Rosa
Luxemburg's version, the "world" capitalist economy had to rely
on "external non-capitalist" space and markets outside of the
capitalist system into which to expand.

<P>
Little is gained in my view, and much better opportunities at
reformulation are needlessly squandered, by inventing new latter
day variations on this old theme, which are little more than
euphemistic. Thus Eric Wolf (1982) and Samir Amin (1991) stand by
a so-called "tributary mode of production," which supposedly
characterised the whole world before 1500 according to the former
and much of it still until 1800 according to the latter. This
book will show that, regardless of the variety of their domestic
relations - never mind mode/s - of production, far more important
is participation in a single world economy, which is only
obscured by this undue or even misplaced emphasis on "modes of
production."  The same is still the case for Gates (1996), who
builds her analysis of a thousand years of China's Motor  on "the
tributary and petty-capitalist modes of production" and is hard
put to show, as she tries, how and why it is these that support
and promote patriarchy in China.

<P>
The latest misplaced and therefore irrelevantly misleading
discussion is summarized by its very title "Do We Need A Theory
of Merchant Capitalism?" (van Zanden 1997). The Spring 1997 issue
of Review, edited by Wallerstein, devotes an entire issue, to
which he also contributes, to this "issue." On the basis of his
analysis of labor markets in the Dutch seventeenth century
'Golden Age,' Van Zanden argues for the affirmative: "Merchant
Capitalism" was a heretofore insufficiently recognized necessary
'stage' between pre- or proto- capitalism and industrial
capitalism. To his credit, Wallerstein (1997) denies this thesis
by showing that Merchant and Dutch capitalism were no more than
part and parcel of "Historical Capitalism," which then and still
now has quite similar features elsewhere as well.  Several other
authors (Ad Knotter, Catharina Lis and Hugo Soly, who in turn
draw on other recent works about "industrialization before
industrialization" in the Netherlands, Flanders and elsewhere in
Europe).  It is enough to make only these comparisons to show
that "van Zandem's terms do not enable analysis of the process:
the articulation of merchant capitalism and precapitalist modes
of production was not at issue, and the protoindustry was not the
most dynamic element in the transition to industrial capitalism"
(Lis and Soly 1997:237).  All the moreso the would these modes of
production cease to be the issue if instead of limiting their
purview only to parts of the marginal peninsular Europe and
extend the examination to the rest of the world, let alone
analyzing them as part and parcel of the whole global economy, as
this book does.


<h4>Weber et al.</h4>

<P>
Other social "scientists" may have risen to dispute Marx [and
supposedly to agree with Smith], but they all agreed with each
other and with Marx  that 1492 and 1498 were the two greatest
events in the history of mankind, because that is when Europe
discovered the world. Never mind that the world had been there
all along and that at least the Afro-Asiatic part of it had long
since shaped Europe itself. Indeed, the eminent historian of
medieval Europe, Henri Pirenne (1992) stressed Europe's external
dependence when pointed out long ago that there could have been
"No Charlemagne without Mohammed."  Nevertheless, history and
social theory have been marked ever since not only by the alleged
uniqueness of [West] Europeans, which supposedly generated "The
Rise of the West."  What is worse, they allegedly also had to
assume the civilizing mission of the white man's burden which
bestowed "the  development and spread of capitalism" on the world
as Europe's and the West's gift to mankind. [Lately, some
feminists have at least denied that this process has been a gift
also to womankind].

<P>
For Max Weber of course agreed with Marx about all these European
origins and characteristics of "capitalism," and with Sombart
too. Weber only wanted to go them one better. Sombart had already
singled out European rationality, and its alleged roots in
Judaism, as the sine qua non of "capitalism" and its "birth" in
Europe. Weber accepted that too.  He further embellished the
argument about the irrigation based "Oriental despotism" to
allege that Asia had an inherent inability to generate economic,
not to mention "capitalist" development on its own.  However,
Weber actually went to a lot of trouble to study "the city,"
"religion" and other aspects of different civilizations in Asia. 

<P>
That additional acquaintance of Weber with Asian realities also
complicated his argument and made it more sophisticated than the
crude Marxian version. For instance, Weber recognized that Asia
had big cities. So they had to be somehow "fundamentally
different" from European ones, both in structure and in function.
Weber's mistake in this regard emerges clearly from the Rowe's
(1984, 1989) carefull examination of this argument in his study
of the Chineese city Hankow.  The great student of bureaucracies
that Weber was also had to recognize that the Chinese also had
and knew how to manage cities and the country at large. Moreover,
he had more time than Marx to observe that and how Western money
made its way to and around various parts of Asia. 

<P>
To continue the already above quoted critical summary of the use
and abuse of "Weberian" theory, their argument is that "Oriental"
and 

<blockquote>
     Islamic society is either timelessly stagnant or declines
     from its inception. The societies are consequently defined
     by reference to a cluster of absences [that allegedly]
     define the West - the missing middle class, the missing
     city, the absence of political rights, the absence of
     revolutions. These missing features ... serve to explain why
     Islamic civilization failed to produce capitalism (Turner
     1978:81, cited by Fitzpatrick 1992: 515).
</blockquote>


So what was the essential difference, the missing ingredient that
"The West" allegedly has and "The Rest" does not have if Weber
himself did not find all these factors missing in the Oriental
societies he studied? For Marx it was "the capitalist mode of
production;" and Weber added also the proper religion and how it
interfaces with the other factors to generate that "capitalist
mode."  Weber went to the trouble to study various major world
religions and concluded that all of them had an essential
mythical, mystic, magical, in a word anti-rational component,
which "necessarily" handicapped all their true believers in
coming to grasps with reality rationally, unlike the Europeans.
Only the latter were beneficiaries of "The Protestant Ethic and
the Spirit of Capitalism." No more than Marx did Weber argue that
this ethic and spirit was the be all and end all of "capitalism,"
and the Weberian argument has been even harder to understand than
the Marxian one. This rational spirit is supposedly the missing
secret ingredient that, when combined with all the others,
distinguishes "The West" from "The Rest."  Without it, the Asians
could not possibly develop capitalism and therefore really
"develop" at all, or even use their cities, production and
commerce. 

<P>
This Eurocentrism had nineteenth century sociological greatgrandfathers 
in the "father of sociology" Auguste Compte and in
Sir Henry Maine who distinguished  between supposedly new forms
of thinking and of social organization based on "science"
and"contract," which allegedly replaced age old "traditional"
ones. One grandfather was Emile Durkheim who idealized "organic"
vs. "mechanical" forms of social organization and another was
Ferdinand Toennis, who alleged a transition from traditional
"Gemeinschaft" to modern "Gesellschaft." In a later generation,
Talcott Parsons idealized "universalist" vs. "particularist"
social forms, and Robert Redfield claimed to have found a
contrast and transition or at least a continuum" between
traditional "folk" and modern "urban" society and a certain
symbiosis between "low" and "high civilization." The Marxist and
contemporary neo-Marxist version is the alleged fundamental
difference between "Asiatic," "feudal" or other forms of
"tributary" and the "capitalist" mode of production (Wolf 1982,
Amin 1991,1993, 1996). 

<P>
All of these "ideal type" diads have several things in common.
The most important ones are that first they posit essentialist
socio-cultural features and differences that are far more
imaginary than real, and then they allege that the differences
distinguish "us" from "them," or in the latter day terminology of
Samuel Huntington  (1993,1996) separate "The West" from "The
Rest." Indeed, allegedly these features  also distinguish modern
[Western] society from its own past as well as from other
societies' often still lingering present. Moreover, these "ideal"
types attribute some kind of pristine self-development to some
peoples - mostly to "us" -  but not to others, and their
subsequent diffusion [when positive] or imposition [if negative]
from here to there. " The quintessential culmination of this
"tradition"  was Lerner's (1958) The Passing of Traditional
Society. In the real world, the only practical holistic choice
has been  "none of the above." This "underdevelopment of
sociology"  was already challenged by me thirty years ago (Frank
1967). However successful, this challenge was nonetheless
insufficiently holistic. The present book is my attempt to do
better.

<P>
However, evidence alone is still not enough and no substitute for
a holistic whole world encompassing theoretical model. That is
what we need but still lack to help organize and interpret the
existing evidence. There are now those who admit the reality of
the trees and even of a world economic and systemic forest. For
instance, Wallerstein (1974,1980, 1989), Frank (1978), Braudel
(1979, 1992), Wolf (1982), Blaut (1993a), Sanderson (1995),
Modelski and Thompson (1996), and Chase-Dunn and Hall (1997) have
offered a more helpful "perspective of the world" and its impact
on local economic and social trees. Moreover, all of them have
self-consciously already tried to offer broader perspectives to
counter parochial Eurocentrism. Yet none of their scheme of
things has been sufficiently global and holistic to encompass the
whole world economic forest. 

<P>
Braudel's "Perspective of the World" since 1500 is broader than
most. Yet he too divided the world into a "European worldeconomy" 
and several other and separate external "worldeconomies" 
outside the same.  Braudel did, of course, also study
and describe at least parts of these "other" world economies,
especially in Volume III of his trilogy on Civilization &amp;
Capitalism. Indeed, so did Marx in his own Volume III of Capital!
Yet both neglected to incorporate the findings of their third
volumes into the model and theory of their first volumes.
Moreover, their neglect was quite conscious, intentional and
deliberate: Their Eurocentrism convinced both that any and all
historical model and social theory, be it universal or not, must
be based on the experience of Europe alone. Their only concession
was that Europe and its model did have consequences for the rest
of the world. 

<P>
This debate about "internal vs. external" turns even the analysis
of the European based  "modern world-economy/system" itself into
yet still another obstacle and resistance to be overcome! For
their argument is also that something "internal" to the European
"modern world-system" generated the transition for feudalism to
capitalism, which then spread to the rest of the world "outside." 
I contend that instead Europe and its "world-economy" were part
and parcel of a long pre-existing Afro-Eurasian economy whose own
systemic structure and dynamic became global -- and itself
generated many developments in Europe as well. Therefore, it is
the "internal" operation of the global world economy - and not
just of the European "world-economy" - that requires analysis.  

 
<h3 align="center">NO EUROPEAN EXCEPTIONALISM</h3>

<P>
We must take exception to this alleged European "exceptionalism"
on several related grounds:

<OL>
  <LI>As already noted above, the theses of AfroAsian
"Orientalism" and European "exceptionalism"  empirically and
descriptively  MIS-represent how Asian economies performed and
societies were. Not only the alleged AMP and "Oriental"
Despotism, but also the allegations about non-rational, antiprofit 
seeking, and other supposed pre-/non-/anticommercial
/productive/capitalist features of Asia are very much
off the mark, as demonstrated by our review of Asia's
participation in the world economy.  In fact,  AfroAsian economic
and financial "development" and institutions were not only up to
European "standards," but largely excelled them in 1400 and still
in 1750 and even in 1800. 

  <LI>For over these three centuries as also earlier, there was
nothing "exceptional" about Europe, unless it was Europe's
exceptionally marginal far off peninsular position on the map and
its correspondingly minor role in the world economy. That may
have afforded it some "advantage of backwardness" (Gerschenkron
1962). None of the alleged European "exceptionalisms" of
"superiority" is borne out by historical evidence, either from
Europe itself or from elsewhere, as Hodgson (1993) warned long
ago and Blaut (1993) unequivocally again demonstrated recently.
Therefore, the really critical factors in Europe's economic
participation and "development" have also been both empirically
and theoretically misrepresented by almost all received
historiography and social theory from Marx and Weber to Braudel
and Wallerstein. No matter what its political color or intent,
their historiography and social theory and that of Tawny or
Toynbee, and Polanyi or Parsons and Rostow -- is devoid of the
historical basis from which its authors claimed to derive it.
Just as Asia was not stuck-in-the-mud, so did Europe not raise
itself by its own bootstraps.


  <LI>The comparative method itself suffers from inadequate 
holism and misplaced concreteness. At its worst, and alas Marx
was among these, some "features" were rather arbitrarily declared
to be essential [to what?] but wanting everywhere except in
Europe. At best, western observers [and alas also some from Asia
and elsewhere] "compare" "Western" civilizational, cultural,
social, political, economic, technological, military,
geographical, climatic, in a word racial "features" with
"Oriental" ones and find the latter wanting on this or that
[Eurocentric] criterion. Among the classical writers, Weber
devoted the greatest study to the comparisons of these factors,
and especially to embellishing the above cited Marxist notions
about Oriental "sacred customs, moral code, and religious law."
His many followers have further embellished this comparative
approach with still more "peculiar" features.  Even if these
comparisons were empirically accurate, which we have observed
that most were not, they had and still have two important
shortcomings: One is how to account for the allegedly significant
factors that are being compared; another is the choice to compare 
these features or factors in the first - and last - place. Yet
the choice of what features or factors to compare is based on the
prior explicit or implicit decision that European characteristics
are significant, distinct and therefore worth comparing with
others. Let us examine these decisions and implicit choices in
turn.

  <LI>The sometimes explicit supposition but mostly implicit
assumption is that the institutional basis and mechanisms of
production and accumulation, exchange and distribution, and their
functional operation are determined by "traditional" historical
inheritance and/or other or local, national, or regional
developments. This kind of "analysis" does not even consider the
possibility that the factors under consideration were local,
national, or regional responses to participation in a single
world-wide economic system and process. Yet as we have argued and
demonstrated above, accumulation, production, and distribution
and their institutional forms throughout Asia, Africa, Europe and
the Americas did adapt to and reflect their common
interdependence. Certainly the institutional form and very
lifeblood of all entrepots like Hormuz and Malacca, and most
other ports and caravan crossroads was a function of their
increasing and decreasing participation in the world economy. But
so were their productive and commercial hinterlands. My study of
Mexican agriculture 1520-1630 showed how successive institutional
forms of labor recruitment and organization were local responses
to world economic and cyclical exigencies (Frank 1979). In
Chapters 2, 3 and 4 we observed analogous institutional 
adaptations and development on the Bengal frontier (Eaton 1993),
South China (Marks 1995), South East Asia (Lieberman 1995), and
the Ottoman Empire (Islamoglu-Inan 1987).      


<P>
Even related  "civilizational" or "cultural" variables are not so
much determinant or independent, as they are themselves
derivative from and dependent on the world-wide economic
structure and process. All attempts to account for or explain
local, national or regional ripple "development/s" primarily in
terms of their respective supposedly cultural or class
"determinants" are too limited in their purview. They neglect the
fundamental world economic sea change of which the local ones
often are only superficial expressions and manifestations. In
short, all attempts to account for features and factors of
"development" on the basis only or even primarily of local
antecedents and in the absence of their world economic "function"
can result only in the neglect of factors that are essential to
any satisfactory explanation.
 

  <LI>Therefore, even the best comparative studies violate the
canon of holism, for they do not study the global whole and the
world economy/system from which the factors to be compared are or
may be derivative. That is, we also need to construct a holistic
theory and analysis of this global economy and world system, as
well as of its own operation and transformation. For these also
generate and shape the institutional forms themselves. A vivid
illustration that we need such a completely different approach is
the issue on NEW APPROACHES TO EUROPEAN HISTORY published in the
Turkish journal Metu. Development Studies, 22,3 1995. It offers a
"Theory of the Rise of the West" by John A. Hall and its
discussion by several Turkish colleagues. Hall admits to "more
than a touch of megalomania" in being "able to offer a completely
new account" of the rise of the West in which he "is going to
solve Max Weber's problem in entirely different terms" (ibid:
231-2). He begins with his own examination of China and brief
references to Islam and Hindu/Buddhist India, which he still
compares unfavorably with Europe, as he already did before (Hall
1985). Economic development allegedly was impossible in China
because of the imperial state, in India because of Hindu caste,
and under Islam because of nomadic pastoral tribalism. All
allegedly lacked the unique European state and inter-state
system. So Hall reverts to the same old argument about European
exceptionalism, except that he gives the latter a slightly "new"
twist.  One of his Turkish commentators makes "rather a defense
of Mr. Hall. I think most of the counter-arguments base
themselves on a certain misunderstanding" (ibid:251). Alas, the
"counter-arguments" of his Turkish colleagues do no more than
take exception to some of Hall's European exceptionalism and
comparisons. They themselves have no alternative explanation or
even approach to offer whatsoever, least of all a holistic one
that would not just compare but relate Europeans and Ottomans
within a single world system. We have only just begun this task
here !

  <LI>However, studies that compare "Western" and "Oriental" 
societies are therefore already vitiated by their choice of the 
features or factors to be compared, unless that choice is itself
derived from the study of the whole world economy/system to begin
with. And of course it is not. Indeed, the choice of the very
features and factors to be compared is derived from focusing on a
part, be that Britain, Europe, the West or wherever. That is, the
very design of the study, from Marx and Weber to Braudel and
Wallerstein, et al suffers from the misplaced concreteness of
looking for the explanandum with a magnifying glass or even a
microscope, but only under the European streetlight. The real
task is first to take up a telescope to gain a holistic view of
the global whole and its world economy/system. Only that can
reveal what passive features, or more likely active factors, we
then need to regard with greater care with a magnifying glass. To
that task as well, we turn in the discussion of implications
below. But first, there are some more derivative conclusions
about what not to do, because doing so prevents seeing "wie es
eigentlich gewesen ist" in the global whole. 

</OL>

<h3 align="center">NO BREAK IN 1450/1492/1498/1500</h3>

<P>
Another and derivative but inescapable conclusion is that the
alleged break before and after 1500 never took place. Historians
often mark a break in "world" history in 1500 (eg. Stavarianos
1966, Reilly 1989). Even Bentley's (1996) innovative proposals
in The American Historical Review to derive "Periodization in
World History" not only from European but from world-wide
processes still marks the beginning of the last period in 1500. 
Historians and social theorists of Europe, both of earlier
generations and still contemporary ones mark this same break all
the moreso. So do world-system theorists like Wallerstein (1974),
and still Sanderson (1994) and Chase-Dunn and Hall (1996). The
allegation that there was a sharp break around 1500 was already
reflected in the above-cited opinions of Smith and Marx that 1492
and 1498 were the most important years in the history of mankind.
Perhaps they were directly so for the peoples of the "New World"
and indirectly so for those of Europe. However, Braudel (1992:57)
disputed Wallertstein's allegation of this break in Europe, where
Braudel saw continuity since at least 1300 and even from 1100. 

<P>
Indeed, even Wallerstein (1992) refers to the widespread
agreement that an expansive "A" phase from 1050 to 1250 was
followed by a contractive "B" phase from 1250 to 1450 and then
after that by still another expansive "A" phase in the "long
sixteenth century" from 1450 until 1640. The evidence above,
however, suggests that this expansive phase already began in much
of Asia in 1400 -- and that it lasted there until at least 1750.
Wallerstein's European "long sixteenth century" probably was a
belated and more temporary expression of this  world economic
expansion itself. Indeed, the very voyages of Columbus and Vasco
da Gama themselves should probably be regarded as expressions of
this world economic expansion, to which Europeans wanted to
attach themselves in Asia. Therefore, the continuity across 1500
was actually far more important and is theoretically far more
significant than any alleged break or new departure. 

<P>
Thus I suggest that it is not appropriate or even necessary, as
the so common argument has it, to regard early modern and still
contemporary history as the result and/or as the harbinger of a
significant historical break. The widespread dis-continuity
theses are far less a contribution, let alone a necessity, and
far more and impediment to understanding the real world
historical process and contemporary reality. These mis-leading
discontinuity theses have been presented in various forms,
including the "birth of capitalism,"  the "Rise of the West,"
"the incorporation of Asia into the European world-economy," not
to mention the West's alleged "rationalism" and "civilizing
mission." I prefer to leave for philosophical consideration by
others elsewhere whether or not modern and contemporary history
is a vehicle or manifestation of "progress," unilinear or
otherwise.

<P>
Here, I prefer to re-consider and question the scientific
validity or analytic usefulness to such time related concepts and
terms as "proto-capitalism" or "proto-industrialization," or for
that matter such "quantitative" ones as "petty-capitalism,"
"semi-feudalism" or "proto-socialism"] here in Europe or there in
Asia. The endless disputations about the alleged transitions from
one to another of these categories at particular but different
times in any  part  the world is a literally blind alley, which
cannot possibly lead to even the faintest enlightenment. For only
the study of the continuing structure and dynamic of the one and
only world [system] can illuminate the hows, whys, and wherefores
of the "development," "rise" or "fall" of any part of the world
[system], be it in Europe, America, Africa, Asia, Oceania and/or
any part thereof.

<h3 align="center">CAPITALISM?</h3>

<P>
Of late, that is since Marx, the "fascination" [as Braudel
(1982:54) called it] with 1500 as the date of a new departure
that makes a supposed break with the past is mostly a function of
the allegation that it ushered in a new, previously unknown or at
least never before dominant, "capitalist mode of production."
That was of course the position from Marx and Sombart to Weber
and Tawney, and all it is still shared by their many contemporary
followers. This is still the position of "world-system" theorists
from Wallerstein (1974) and Frank (1978) to Sanderson (1995) and
Chase-Dunn (1996). Even Amin's (1991,1993) and Blaut's (1993)
vehement critiques of Eurocentrism stop short of abandoning 1500
as the dawn of a new age of European born and borne capitalism. 
All of the above Marxists, Weberians, Polanyists, worldsystematizers, 
not to mention most "economic" and other
historians, balk at pursuing the evidence and the argument to
examine the sacred cow of "capitalism" and its allegedly
peculiarly exceptional or exceptionally peculiar "mode of
production." 

<P>
Therefore, the mere suggestion that perhaps this conviction might
or even should be open to question is already rejected as
unacceptable heresy.  Having already broached this heresy to
little effect before (Frank 1991, Frank and Gills 1993), there is
little point in trying to pursue the argument further here.
Suffice it to point out that the same evidence and argument that
support the first four conclusions above also have implications
for the idea of "capitalism." These conclusions deny the AMP and
European exceptionalism, but affirm a world economy and its
continuity across 1500. Yet world-system theorists and Blaut
accept the first two above-cited conclusions about the AMP and
European exceptionalism, but they reject the last two that affirm
the continuity of a global economy and deny the break in 1500.
Braudel in turn also denies the break in 1500 and de facto
recognizes a global economy, even if hit does not fit it into his
model of a European "world-economy."  Yet all four of the
previous conclusions inexorably render questionable to say the
least the very concept of a "capitalist" mode of production and
the supposed significance of its alleged spread from Europe to
the rest of the world. Indeed, the first four conclusions
question the very significance imputed to different "modes of
production," of course including "feudalism" and "capitalism,"
not to mention any alleged "transition" between them. This
received conceptualization has at the very least diverted our
attention away from the much more significant world systemic
structures and processes, which themselves engendered the
organizational forms that were then misleadingly termed "feudal"
and "capitalist" "modes of production."

<P>
As we have observed, not only was there no unilinear
"progress/ion" from one "mode" of production to another; but all
manner of relations of production were and remain widely
intermingled. Many different relations of production have
"delivered" products that have been competitive on the world
market. However, it has not been so much one relation or another,
and still less any "mode," of production that has determined the
success and failure of particular producers. Instead, competitive
pressures and exigencies on the world market have been and
continue to be much more determinant of the choice and adaptation
of relations of production themselves.  

<P>
The incessant discussions about non-, pre-, proto-, blooming-,
full blown-, declining-, post-, or any other "stage"  and
quantity or quality of capitalism or the lack thereof have led us
down the garden path and diverted us from analyzing the real
world. A recent example was already mentioned: Hill Gates (1996)
does very well to examine the relations between commercialism and
patriarchy in a thousand years of China's Motor. However, her
continued insistence on using the categories of "the tributary
and petty capitalist modes of production" and their uneasy
relations handicaps instead of illuminating her analysis of the
real world issues.   

<P>
The review of van Zanden's "marchant capitalism" also rebuts the
contention that it represented a distinctive "articulation of
modes of production" between "non-capitalist" modes of
reproduction and use of labor "outside the system" and others
inside the "world market" of the "world-economy." However, the
hidden but most revealing aspect of this discussion is that,
irrespective of which side of the arguments they support, all of
the discussants recur to these terms in quotation marks again and
again. But they all use them without quotation marks, because
they largely agree on the meaning and referents of what is
allegedly excluded by these terms. Indeed, van Zanden and others
even name several of them: slaves, peasants,  those who work at
home in cottage industry, in West Africa, and in East Asia (van
Zanden 1997: 260). In all this discussion and the related
literature it refers to, all these producers and even traders
remain outside their universe of discourse in which "admittedly,
the Dutch Republic became the largest staple market the world had
even known;" so "Amsterdam was both the central warehouse of
world commerce and the pivotal money and capital market of the
European world-economy at the same time;" and therefore it was
"the world-economy's control booth" (Lis and Soly 1997: 233, 211,
222). That is, for all these discussants about "modes of
production." the real  world economy, of which Amsterdam was but
an outpost, does not exist.

<P>
Indeed, Wallerstein's (1997: 244) intervention even stresses "let
us not quibble about the unit of analysis"!  But the most
important issue in this whole discussion is precisely the unit of
analysis, which all of the participants disregard: the world
economy and not their little European one. The moment we
recognize that, the whole discussion about "modes of production"
more than pales into  insignificance and irrelevance: For then it
can finally been seen as the distraction that it really is from
the real issue, which is the holistic analysis of the whole.

<P>
Therefore, it is much better to cut [out] the Gordian knot of
"capitalism" altogether. That was already my argument in Frank
(1991), Frank and Gills (1992, 1993), and Frank (1994,1995); and
it is well put by Chaudhuri (1990:84) writing under the title
Asia Before Europe: "The ceaseless quest of modern historians
looking for the 'origins' and roots of capitalism is not much
better than the alchemist's search for the philosopher's stone
that transforms base metal into gold." Indeed, that is the case
not only for the origins and roots, but the very existence and
meaning of "capitalism." So, best just forget about it, and get
on with our inquiry into the reality of "universal history, wie
es eigentlich gewesen ist." 


<p>
<table width=100% border>
<tr>
  <td>
    <a href="index.html">Table of Contents</a><br>
  <td>
    <a href="personal.html">Personal and Professional</a><br>
  <td>
    <a href="research.html">Research Interests</a><br>
<tr>
  <td>
    <a href="pubs_new.html">Publications</a><br>
  <td>
    <a href="reorient.html"><i>ReOrient: 
      Global Economy in the Asian Age</i></a><br>
  <td>
    <a href="new_world_order.html">On the New World Order</a>
<tr>
  <td>
    <a href="online.html">On-line Essays</a><br>
  <td>
    <a href="IISG_Pubs.htm">IISH Archives</a><br>
  <td>
    <a href="agf_internet.htm">AGF on the Internet</a><br>
</table>
</body></html>
 contentType 9 text/html url 61 http://www.rrojasdatabank.info:80/agfrank/reorient_intro.html responseCode 3 200 